Part I (lady with a dog).
They said that a new face appeared on the embankment: a lady with a dog.
Dmitry Dmitrich Gurov, who lived in Yalta for two weeks and accustomed here, also became interested in new persons.
Sitting in the pavilion at the right, he saw on the embankment a young lady was held, low gloss blonde, in beret; Behind her, white spitz fled.
And then he met her in the city garden and on the square several times a day.
She walked alone, everything is in the same take, with white spitz; No one knew who she was, and called her just like this: a lady with a dog.
"If she is here without a husband and without acquaintances," the Gurov wondered, "it would not be superfluous to meet her."
He was still no forty, but he had a daughter of twelve years and two son-gymnasian.
He was married early when he was still a second year student, and now the wife seemed to be one and a half times older than him.
It was a woman high, with dark eyebrows, straight, important, solid and, as she herself called herself, thinking.
She read a lot, did not write in letters to Kommersant, called her husband did not Dmitry, and Dimitri, and he secretly considered it near, narrow, inevitable, was afraid of her and did not like to be at home.
He began to change it for a long time ago, changed often and probably, therefore, women responded almost always badly, and when in his presence they talked about them, he called them like this: - Lost Race!
It seemed to him that he was quite taught by bitter experience in order to call them anyhow, but still without a "lower race" he could not live two days.
In the society of men, he was boring, not in itself, with them he was undiscoverable, cold, but when he was among women, he felt free and knew what to talk to them and how to keep himself; And even silent with them it was easy.
In his appearance, in the character, in his entire nature there was something attractive, elusive, which had places to him, damn them; He knew about it, and he himself was also some power toward them.
The experience of multiple, in fact, bitter experience, taught him a long time that every rapprochement, which is first so pleasant to diversify life and seems to be a cute and easy adventure, in decent people, especially Muscovites, severe on the rise, indecisive, inevitably grows into a whole task, Extremely complex, and the situation in the end becomes painful.
But with any new meeting with an interesting woman, this experience somehow slipped out of memory, and I wanted to live, and everything seemed so simple and funny.
And once in the evening he dined in the garden, and the lady in the beret approached slowly to take a nearby table.
Her expression, gait, dress, hairstyle told him that she was from a decent society, married, in Yalta for the first time and one that she is bored here ...
In the stories about the impurity of local morals, he despised them and knew that such stories mostly composed by people who themselves would have sinned themselves if they were able to, but when the lady sat down for the next three-steps from him, he remembered these Stories about lung victories, about traveling to the mountains, and seductive thought about the ambulance, fleeting, about the novel with an unknown woman who do not know by name and surname, suddenly took possession of them.
He gently nailed Spitz to himself and, when he approached, shook his finger.
Spitz twisted.
Gurov again shook.
The lady looked at him and immediately lowered his eyes.
"He doesn't bite," she said and blushed.
- Can I give him a bone?
"And when she approved his head affirmatively, he asked friendly:" Have you known to come to Yalta for a long time? "
- Day five.
- And I already reach the second week here.
Sorry a bit.
- Time goes quickly, and meanwhile here is such a boredom! She said, without looking at him.
- It is only customary to say that it is boring here.
The man in the street lives somewhere in Bellev or Visa - and he is not boring, but will come here: "Ah, boring!
Ah, dust! "
Think that he came from Grenada.
She laughed.
Then both continued to eat silently as unfamiliar; But after lunch went nearby - and the humble, easy conversation of people are free, satisfied, who do not care wherever to go about anything.
They walked and talked about how strangely lit the sea; The water was lilac, so soft and warm, and the golden strip came from the moon.
They talked about how stuffy after a hot day.
Gurov said that he was Muscovite, by education philologist, but serves as a bank; I was preparing to sometime sing in a private opera, but threw, he has two houses in Moscow ...
And he learned from her that she grew up in St. Petersburg, but married to S., where he had been living for two years, which she would stay in Yalta from a month and after her, perhaps her husband, who also want to relax.
She could not explain in any way where her husband serves, - in the provincial board or in the provincial Zemstvo administration, and it was funny to her.
And he learned the gurov that her name was Anna Sergeyevna.
Then he thought about her in her room, that tomorrow she would probably meet with him.
That is how it should be.
Looking at bedtime, he remembered that she was still so recently a institution, she studied, anyway, how now his daughter, remembered how much more foulness, angularity was in her laughter, in a conversation with an unfamiliar, - she must be, this is the first time in life she There was one, in such an atmosphere, when they walk behind her, and they look at it, and they speak with her only with one secret goal about which she cannot but guess.
He remembered her thin, weak neck, beautiful, gray eyes.
"Something in it is a pitiful still," he thought and began to fall asleep.
Part II (lady with a dog).
Passed a week after dating.
There was a festive day.
It was stuffy in the rooms, and the dust rushed on the streets, the hats broke.
All day I wanted to drink, and Gurov often went to the pavilion and offered Anna Sergeyevna that water with syrup, then ice cream.
Nowhere was to go.
In the evening, when a little duck, they went for them to see how the steamer would come.
There were a lot of walking on the pier; Gathered to meet someone, kept bouquets.
And here two features of the elegant Yalta crowd, the elderly ladies were dressed as young, and there were many generals.
On the occasion of excitement on the sea, the steamer came late when the sun was already the village, and, before climbing a molat, he turned around for a long time.
Anna Sergeyevna looked at Lornnetka on a steamer and passengers, as if looking for acquaintances, and when he turned to Gurov, her eyes glistened.
She spoke a lot, and she had the questions from her, and she herself immediately forgot, as she asked; Then he lost Lornnetka in the crowd.
The elegant crowd was diverged, there was no more persons, the wind verse was completely, and Gurov and Anna Sergeyevna stood, exactly waiting if anyone from a steamost would come.
Anna Sergeyevna was already silent and sniffed flowers, without looking at Gurov.
"Weather in the evening became better," he said.
- Where can we go now?
Will you go somewhere?
She did not answer.
Then he looked closely at her and suddenly hugged her and kissed her lips, and he was planted with a smell and moisture colors, and immediately he looked at him: did he see anyone? "Let's go to you ..." he said quietly.
And both went fast.
She had stuffy in her room, smelled of spirits she bought in a Japanese store.
Gurov, looked at her now, thought: "What only happens in the life of the meetings!"
From the past, he preserved the memory of the carefree, good-natured women, merry from love, thankful him for happiness, at least very short; And about such, - as, for example, his wife - who loved without sincerity, with excessive conversations, mannered, with hysteria, with such an expression, as if not love, not a passion, but something more significant; and about two or three, very beautiful, cold, who suddenly flashed on the face of a predatory expression, a stubborn desire to take, snatch in life more than it can give, and it was not the first youth, capricious, not reasoning, power, not Smart Women, and when Gurov got across them, then the beauty of them excited in it hatred and lace on their lingerie seemed to him then look like a science.
But here all the same frost, angularity of inexperienced youth, awkward feeling; And it was the impression of confusion, as if someone suddenly knocked on the door.
Anna Sergeyevna, this "lady with a dog", to what happened, I treated somehow especially, very seriously, accurately to my fall, "it seemed so, and it was strange and inappropriate.
She fell away, the features were laughed and long hair was sadly hung, she thought of a sad pose, precisely a sinner on an old picture.
"Not good," she said.
- You do not respect me now.
On the table in the room was a watermelon.
Gurov cut off a hunk and began to eat slowly.
It has passed, at least half an hour in silence.
Anna Sergeyevna was touching, from her I had a purity of decent, naive, little woman living; A lone candle burning on the table, barely covered her face, but it was clear that she had no good in his soul.
- Why could I stop respecting you? - asked Gurov.
- You yourself do not know what you say.
- May God forgive me! She said, and her eyes were filled with tears.
- It's horrible.
- You just justify yourself.
- What should I justify?
I am a bad, low woman, I do not think about excuses about justification.
I did not deceive my husband, but myself.
And not now, but I have been cheating for a long time.
My husband, perhaps, honest, good man, but he is a moat!
I do not know what he does there, as serves, but I only know that he is a moat.
I was when I went out for him, it was twenty years old, curiosity was tomil, I wanted something better; After all, there is also, "I said to myself, the other life.
I wanted to live!
Live and live ...
Curiosity burned me ...
You do not understand this, but, I swear God, I could no longer own myself, something was done with me, I could not hold me, I told my husband that he was sick, and went here ...
And here everything went, as in a quarrel, like a crazy ... And so I became a vulgar, cracked woman, which anyone can despise.
Gurov was already boring to listen, it annoyed a naive tone, it repentance, such an unexpected and inappropriate; If it were not for tears in our eyes, it would be possible to think that she was joking or plays a role.
"I don't understand," he said quietly, "what do you want?"
She hid his face on his chest and pressed against him.
"Believe me, believe me, begging you ..." she said.
- I love honest, clean life, and sin to me gas, I myself do not know what I do.
Simple people say: unclean toward.
And I can now say to myself that I was nearly attained.
"Fully, full ..." he mumbled.
He looked at her fixed, frightened eyes, kissed her, said quietly and affectionately, and she gradually calmed down, and the greeliness returned to her; Began both laugh.
Then, when they came out, there was no soul on the embankment, the city with his cypressives had a very dead appearance, but the sea was still noisy and beat about the shore; One Barcas was swinging on the waves, and the flashlight was sleepy on it.
Found the cab driver and went to Oreand.
"I now know your last name at the front:" Diders vision written on the board, "Gurov said.
- Your husband is German?
"No, he seems to be a German, but he himself is Orthodox."
In Oreanda sat on the bench, not far from the church, looked down at sea and silent.
Yalta was barely visible through the morning fog, on the tops of the mountains, white clouds stood motionless.
The foliage did not move on the trees, shouted the cicadas, and the monotonous, deaf noise of the sea, who came from the bottom, spoke of peace, about the eternal dream, which awaits us.
So noisily was at the bottom, when there was no Yalta, no Oreanda, now the noise and will noise the same indifferent and deafly when we are not.
And in this constancy, in full indifference to the life and death of each of us lies, perhaps, the guarantee of our eternal salvation, the continuous movement of life on earth, continuous perfection.
Sitting next to a young woman who at dawn seemed so beautiful, soothered and fascinated in mind this fabulous environment - the sea, mountains, clouds, widespread sky, Gurov thought about how, in essence, if you think about, everything is fine in this light, Everything, besides that we are thoughts and do when we forget about the highest goals of being, about our human dignity.
Some man approached - it must be a watchman, "looked at them and left.
And this detail seemed so mysterious and also beautiful.
It was seen, as the steamer from Feodosia came, lit by morning gursing, already without lights.
"Rosa on the grass," said Anna Sergeevna after silence.
- Yes.
Time to go home.
They returned to the city.
Then everyday they met on the embankment, had breakfast together, dinner, walked, admired the sea.
She complained that he sleeps badly and that her heart beats anxiously, asked all the same questions, worried that jealousy, then fear that he had no sufficient fear.
And often on the square or in the garden, when there was no one near them, he suddenly attracted her to himself and kissed passionately.
Perfect idleness, these kisses among the White Day, with a loaf and fear, no matter how anyone who did not see, the heat, the smell of the sea and the constant flashes before the eyes of idle, elegant, filled people accurately reborn it; He spoke Anna Sergeyevna about how she was good as he was seductive, there was an impatiently passionate, did not move away from her, and she often thought about and asked him to confess that he did not respect her, he didn't like him at all, but only sees It is a dutiful woman.
Almost every evening later they left somewhere outside the city, in Oreand or the waterfall; And the walk was lucky, the impressions were invariably every time were beautiful, great.
I was waiting for a husband.
But the letter came from him, in which he missed that his eyes had a breakdown, and begged his wife back home.
Anna Sergeyevna hurried.
"It's good that I'm leaving," she said Gurov.
- This is the fate itself.
She went on horseback, and he escaped her.
Drove all day.
When she sat down in the car of the courier train and when he struck the second call, she said: - Give me, I'll see for you more ...
Let's see again.
Like this.
She did not cry, but was sad, accurately sick, and her face trembled.
"I'll think about you ... remember," she said.
- Lord with you, stay.
Do not commit disaster.
We are forgiven forever, it is so necessary because it would not be necessary to meet at all.
Well, the Lord is with you.
The train left quickly, his lights soon disappeared, and in a minute noise was not heard, accurately everything was talking on purpose to stop as soon as possible, it was madness.
And, left alone on the platform and looking into the dark Dal, Gurov listened to the cry of grasshoppers and the buzz of the telegraph wire with such a feeling as if he had just woken up.
And he thought that in his life there was another infancy or an adventure, and it was also over, and now the memories remained ...
He was a togan, sad and experienced a light remorse; After all, this young woman with whom he will never see himself will never be happy with him; He was friendly with her and cordient, but still in handling her, in his tone and caressing a shadow of a light mockery, a rich arrogance of a happy man, who is also almost twice as older.
All the time she called him good, extraordinary, sublime; Obviously, he seemed not to her what he really was, which means that she was involuntarily deceived her ...
Here at the station already smelled in autumn, the evening was cool.
"It's time for me to the north," Gurov thought, leaving the platform.
- It's time! "
Part III (lady with a dog).
At home in Moscow, everything was already in the winter, the furnaces were treated, and in the morning, when the children gathered in the gymnasium and drank tea, it was dark, and the nanny flashed the fire for a long time.
Frost has already begun.
When the first snow goes, on the first day of driving on the sleigh, it's nice to see white ground, white roofs, breathing softly, nice, and at this time young years are remembered.
Old Lipa and Berez, White from Inea, good-natured expression, are closer to the heart than cypresses and palm trees, and near them no longer want to think about the mountains and the sea.
Gurov was a Muscovite, he returned to Moscow to a good, frosty day, and when she put a fur coat and warm gloves and walked on Petrovka, and when he heard the ringing of bells on Saturday evening, the recent trip and places in which he was lost everything for him Charm.
Little, he plunged into Moscow life, he already read three newspapers on the day and said that he did not read Moscow newspapers from the principle.
He was already drawn into restaurants, clubs, on the dinners, anniversaries, and he was already flattering that he had well-known lawyers and artists and that he plays the card with a professor in the Doctoral Club.
Already he could eat a whole portion of the village on a frying pan ...
Any month will be held, and Anna Sergeyevna, it seemed to him, would turn in the memory of the fog and only occasionally would dream with a touching smile, as the others dreamed.
But more than a month passed, there was a deep winter, and everything was clear in mind, he just broke up with Anna Sergeyevna just yesterday.
And the memories flared up more and more.
Whether in the evening silence in his office, the voices of children who preparing lessons heard whether he heard a romance or an organ in the restaurant, or overflowing a blizzard in the fireplace, as he suddenly resurrected in mind everything: and what was on a mullet, and early morning with fog on Mountains, and steamer from Feodosia, and kisses.
He walked around the room for a long time and he recalled, and smiled, and then the memories went into dreams, and the past in the imagination would have interfered with what would be.
Anna Sergeyevna did not dream of him, but he walked everywhere as a shadow, and watched him.
Closing her eyes, he saw her as a living, and she seemed more beautiful, younger, more tender than it was; And he himself seemed better than he was then in Yalta.
She looked at him in the evenings from the bookcase, from the fireplace, from the corner, he heard her breathing, affectionate rustling of her clothes.
On the street he watched women, I was looking for, whether there is no bit like it ...
And already tomil a strong desire to share with someone with his memories.
But at home it was impossible to talk about her love, and outside the house - not with whom.
Not with the tenants and not in the bank.
And what to talk about?
Did he loved then?
Was there anything beautiful, poetic, or instructive, or just interesting in his relationship to Anna Sergeyevna?
And I had to say indefinitely about love, about women, and no one guessed it, what's the matter, and only the wife moved with her dark eyebrows and said: - You, Dimitri, is not the role of Fata.
One night, leaving the doctoral club with his partner, an official, he could not resist and said: "If you know, with what charming woman I met in Yalta!"
The official sat down in Sani and drove, but suddenly turned around and called: - Dmitry Dmitrich!
- What?
- And lethae you were right: sturgeon something with a shirt!
These words, such ordinary, for some reason suddenly outraged Gurov, seemed humiliating, unclean.
What wild morals, what faces!
What kind of stupid nights, which are uninteresting, imperceptible days!
Furious game in cards, gluttony, drunkenness, constant conversations are all about one.
Unnecessary affairs and conversations about one grant on their share the best part of the time, the best strength, and in the end there is some kind of kutsaya, a woundless life, some kind of nonsense, and leave and it is impossible to escape, just sit in a crazy house or in the Arrest Rotes!
Gurov did not sleep all night and outraged and then spent the whole day with a headache.
And in the next night he slept badly, everything sat in bed and thought or walked from the corner to the corner.
Children are tired, the bank is tired, did not want to go anywhere, nothing to talk about.
In December, on the holidays, he gathered on the road and told his wife that he was leaving for St. Petersburg to bother for one young man, - and went to S. Why?
He himself did not know well.
He wanted to see Anna Sergeyevna and talk, arrange a date if possible.
He arrived at S. in the morning and took the best number in the hotel, where the entire floor was covered with a gray soldier cloth and was on the table inkwell, gray from dust, with a horseman on a horse, who had a hand with a hat, and his head was raped.
The Swiss gave him the necessary information: The background of the Diders lives on an old-pottery street, in his own house - it is not far from the hotel, lives well, rich, has his horses, everyone knows him in the city.
The Swiss spoke like this: Drydiritz.
Gurov slowly went to the old-pottery, found the house.
Just a fence, gray, long, with nails stretched at home.
"I will kill such a fence," said Gurov, looking at the windows, then on the fence.
He conspirressed: Today is unusual day, and the husband is probably at home.
And anyway, it would be a blind job to enter the house and confused.
If you send a note, then she, perhaps, falls into my hands, and then everything can be spoiled.
It is best to rely on the case.
And he walked down the street and near the fence and waited for this case.
He saw a beater in the gate, and the dogs attacked him, then, after an hour later, heard the game on the piano, and the sounds came the weak, unclear.
Anna Sergeyevna must have played.
The front door suddenly opened, and some old woman came out of it, and he fled the familiar white spitz.
Gurov wanted to call a dog, but his heart suddenly beat, and he could not remember the name of Spitz.
He walked and more and more hated a gray fence, and already thought with irritation that Anna Sergeyevna forgot about him and, perhaps, already having fun with another, and it is so natural in the position of a young woman who is forced from morning to see this Damned fence.
He returned to his room and sat on the sofa for a long time, not knowing what to do, then dined, then I slept.
"How everything is stupid and restless," he thought, waking up and looking at the dark windows; Was already evening.
- So I got enough sleep.
What will I do now at night? "
He sat on the bed covered with a cheap gray, exactly a hospital blanket, and teased himself with annoyance: "Here's a lady with a dog ...
Here's an adventure ...
So sit here. "
Still in the morning, at the station, he rushed into the eye of the poster with very large letters: she went for the first time "Geisha".
He remembered this and went to the theater.
"It is very possible that it happens in the first ideas," he thought.
Theater was full.
And here, as in general in all provincial theaters, there was a fog higher chandelier, the gallery was noisily worried; In the first row before the beginning of the presentation stood local Frant, having laid hands; And here, in the governor's bed, the governor's daughter was sitting first in the first place, and the governor himself was modestly hiding behind the core, and only his hands were visible; The curtain was rocking, the orchestra was tuned for a long time.
All the time, until the audience came and occupied the place, Gurov Eagerly sought her eyes.
Anna Sergeevna entered.
She sat down in the third row, and when Gurov looked at her, he squeezed his heart, and he understood it clear that for him now there is no closer on the whole world, more expensive than man; She, lost in the provincial crowd, this little woman, not wonderful, with Vulgar Lornnetka in his hands, was filled now all his life, he was grief, joy, the only happiness, which he now wanted for himself; And under the sounds of a bad orchestra, DRYED philistine violins, he thought about how good she was.
I thought and dreamed.
Together with Anna Sergeyevna entered and sat down near the young man with small baked baked, very high, sutured; At each step, he swayed his head and seemed to be constantly bowed.
It was probably the husband, whom she then in Yalta, in a gusting of a bitter feeling, called Lacey.
And in fact, in his long figure, in the Baked, in a small bald, there was something laksy-modest, he smiled sweetly, and in a loaf he was glistened to some scholar icon, exactly the Lacéic number.
In the first intermission, the husband went smoking, she stayed in a chair.
Gurov, sitting, too, in the parquet, went to her and told a trembling voice, smiling forcibly: - Hello.
She looked at him and turned pale, then she looked at his horror once again, not believing her eyes, and fastened fan and Lornnetka, obviously, struggling with her, so as not to faint.
Both were silent.
She was sitting, he stood, frightened by her embarrassment, not deciding to sit down next.
Put the configurable violins and flute, suddenly it was scary, it seemed that they were watching from all the lies.
But she got up and quickly went to the exit; He is behind her, and both walked, along the corridors, on the stairs, then climbing, then descending, and they flashed some people in the judicial, teacher and specific uniforms, and all with icons; Ladies flashed, fur coats on the hangers, blew through the wind, hiding the smell of tobacco cigarettes.
And Gurov, who had a lot of heart, thought: "Oh my God!
And what are these people, this orchestra ... "
And at that moment, he suddenly remembered how even in the evening at the station, having conducted Anna Sergeyevna, he spoke himself that everything was over and they would never see.
But how far was to the end!
On a narrow, gloomy staircase, where it was written "a move in the amphitheater", she stopped.
- How did you scare me! She said, breathing heavily, still pale, stunned.
- Oh, how you scared me!
I barely alive.
Why did you come?
What for? "But understand, Anna, understand ..." he spoke in a low voice, rushing.
- I beg you, understand ...
She looked at him with fear, with a plea, with love, looked intently to stronger to detain in the memory of his features.
- I suffer so much! - she continued, not listening to him.
"I thought only about you all the time, I lived thoughts about you."
And I wanted to forget, forget, but why, why did you come?
Higher, on the site, two gymnasian smoked and looked down, but Gurov was still, he attracted Anna Sergeyevna to him and began to kiss her face, cheeks, hands.
- What do you do what you do! She said in horror, removing him from herself.
- We are confused.
Leave today, leaving now ...
I spell you all saints, I beg ...
Go here!
On the ladder from the bottom up, someone went.
"You have to leave ..." continued Anna Sergeyevna with a whisper.
- Hear, Dmitry Dmitrich?
I will come to you in Moscow.
I have never been happy, I am now unhappy and never, I will never be happy, never!
Do not make me suffer even more!
I swear, I will come to Moscow.
And now part!
My dear, kind, my dear, part!
She shook his hand and began to quickly descend down, looking back at him, and she was seen in her eyes that she was not really happy.
Gurov stood a little, listened, then, when everything calmed down, I found my hanger and left the theater.
Part IV (lady with a dog).
And Anna Sergeyevna began to come to him to Moscow.
Once every two or three months she left S. and said her husband that she had to consult with a professor about his female illness, "and the husband believed and did not believe.
Arriving to Moscow, she stopped at the Slavic Bazaar and immediately sent a person to Gurov in the Red Cap.
Gurov walked to her, and no one in Moscow knew about it.
Once he walked to her in this way in the winter morning (the messenger was in his evening before and did not find it).
With him, his daughter wanted to spend him in the gymnasium, it was on the road.
Valil is a big sleet.
"Now three degrees of heat, and meanwhile there is snow," said the guro daughter.
- But it is warm only on the surface of the earth, in the upper layers of the atmosphere, a completely different temperature.
- Dad, why is there no thunder in winter?
He explained it.
He spoke and thought that here he was on a date and no live soul knows about it and probably never know.
He had two lives: one obvious, which was seen and knew everything to whom it had to have had a complete conditional truth and conditional deception, similar to the life of his acquaintances and friends, and the other - who flowed secretly.
And on some strange coincidence, perhaps, it is interesting, everything that it was important for him is interesting, it is necessary, what he was sincerely and did not deceive himself, which was the grain of his life, was secretly from others, yet What was his lie, his shell, in which he was hiding to hide the truth, like, for example, his service in a bank, disputes in the club, his "lowest race", walking with his wife on the anniversary - all this was clearly.
And by myself he judged Others, did not believe that I saw, and always assumed that every person under the cover of the mystery, as under the cover of the night, his real, the most interesting life takes place.
Each personal existence is held on a secret, and perhaps, in part, therefore, a cultural person is so nervously thoroughly, the personal secret is respected.
After conducting a daughter to the gymnasium, Gurov went to the "Slavic Bazaar".
He removed the fur coat at the bottom, rose upstairs and knocked softly on the door.
Anna Sergeyevna, dressed in his favorite gray dress, tired of expensive and waiting, waited for him from yesterday; She was pale, looked at him and did not smile, and hardly he entered how she had fallen to his chest.
For sure, they did not see two years, the kiss was long, long.
- Well, how do you live there? - he asked.
- What's new?
- Wait, now I will say ...
Can not.
She could not speak, as I cried.
Turned away from him and pressed a handkerchief to the eyes.
"Well, let me pay, and I'll sit down," he thought and sat down in a chair.
Then he called and said to be brought to him; And then, when tea drank, she was all stood, turning away to the window ...
She cried from excitement, from the mournful consciousness that their life was so sad; They only see secretly, hide from people like thieves!
Does life are not broken?
- Well, stop it! - he said.
It was obvious for him that this of their love will end not soon, it is unknown when.
Anna Sergeyevna was tied to him more stronger, adored him, and it would be unthinkable to tell her that all this should have ever the end; Yes, she would not believe it.
He approached her and took her by the shoulders to climb, joke, and at that time he saw himself in the mirror.
His head has already begun to be seen.
And it seemed to him as strange that he was so aged in recent years, so drove.
The shoulders on which they lay his hands were warm and shuddered.
He felt the compassion for this life, still so warm and beautiful, but probably close to start to fade and wither how his life.
What does she love him like that?
He always seemed to women not by whom he was, and they loved not himself in him, but a man who created their imagination and whom they searched in their lives; And then, when they noticed their mistake, they still loved.
And none of them was happy with him.
Time went, he got acquainted, converged, parted, but never loved; Everything was anything, but not love.
And now, when his head became gray, he loved, as it should, truly - the first time in his life.
Anna Sergeyevna and he loved each other as very close, native people, like a husband and wife, like tender friends; It seemed to them that the fate itself intended them for each other, and it was not clear why he was married, and she was married; And for sure these were two migratory birds, male and female, which were caught and forced to live in individual cells.
They forked each other what was ashamed in their past, they forgred everything in the present and felt that this of their love changed them both.
Before, in sad moments, he calmed himself with all sorts of reasoning, which only came to his mind, now he was not before reasoning, he felt deep compassion, wanted to be sincere, gentle ... - stop, my good, he said.
- Puckoo - and will ...
Now let's talk, come up with something.
Then they consulted for a long time, they said how to get rid of themselves from the need to hide, deceive, live in different cities, do not see for a long time.
How to get rid of these unbearable ways?
- How? How? He asked, grabbing himself.
- How?
And it seemed that a little more - and the decision would be found, and then a new, wonderful life will begin; And both it was clear that to the end is still far and far and that the most difficult and difficult to just begins.