On page 22 of the history of the European War, of Liddell Hart, it is read that an offensive of thirteen British divisions (supported by a thousand four hundred pieces of artillery) against the SERRE MUNAUBAN line had been planned for the twenty-four July 1916 and He must have been postponed until the morning of the twenty-nine day.
The torrential rains (scores Captain Liddell Hart) provoked that delay -nate significant, by the way.
The following statement, dictated, relent and signed by Dr. Yu Tsun, ancient English professor at the Tsingtao Hochschule, throws a unsuspected light on the case.
The two initial pages are missing.
... and hung up the tube.
Immediately after, I recognized the voice he had answered in German.
It was that of Captain Richard Madden.
Madden, in the department of Viktor Runeberg, wanted to say the end of our Afanes and -But that seemed very secondary, or should be- also of our lives.
I meant that Runeberg had been arrested or killed.
Before the sun will declined that day, I would run the same fate.
Madden era implacable.
Better said, I was obliged to be relentless.
Irish to the orders of England, man accused of tibie and perhaps of betrayal How was not he going to embrace and thank this miraculous favor: discovery, capture, perhaps the death, of two agents of the German Empire?
I went up to my room; I absurdly closed the door with key and I threw my back on the narrow iron bed.
In the window there were the usual roofs and the cloudy sun of six.
I found it incredible that day without premonitions or symbols was that of my implacable death.
In spite of my dead father, despite being a child in a symmetrical hasty garden, I, now, was going to die?
Then I reflected that all things happen to one precisely, precisely now.
Centuries of centuries and only the facts occur; innumerable men in the air, on earth and the sea, and everything that really happens happens to me ...
The almost intolerable memory of Madden's finished face abolished those divagations.
In the middle of my hatred and my terror (now I do not mind talking about terror: now that I made a mocked Richard Madden, now that my throat longs for the rope) I thought that tumultuous warrior and certainly happy did not suspect that I had the secret .
The name of the precise place of the new British Artillery Park on the Ancre.
A bird scratched the gray sky and blindly translated it into an airplane and that airplane in many (in the French sky) annihilating the artillery park with vertical pumps.
If my mouth, before I got rid of a bullet, I could scream that name so that they heard it in Germany ... my human voice was very poor.
How to make it reach the head of the boss?
In the ear of that sick and hateful man, who did not know about Runeberg and me but we were on Staffordshire and that in vain our news was expected in his arid Berlin Office, examining infinitely newspapers ...
I said aloud: "I must flee.
"I joined me without noise, in a useless perfection of silence, as if Madden was already stalking me.
Something - perhaps the mere ostentation to prove that my resources were null-made my pockets check.
I found what I knew I was going to find: the American clock, the nickel chain and the quadrangular currency, the keychain with the compromising useless keys of the department of Runeberg, the notebook, a letter that I decided to destroy immediately (and that I did not destroy), A crown, two shillings and some pêniques, red-blue pencil, handkerchief, revolver with a bullet.
I absurdly wielded it and weighs it to give me value.
Vaguely I phered that a pistolletazo can be heard far away.
In ten minutes my plan was mature.
The phone book gave me the name of the only person capable of transmitting the news: I lived in a suburb of Fenton, less than half an hour from train.
I am a cowardly man.
Now I say it, now that I have led to term a plan that nobody will not qualify from risky.
I know that its execution was terrible.
I did not do it by Germany, no.
I do not care about a barbarian country, which has forced me to the abjection of being a spy.
Also, I know of a man from England - a man modest - that for me it is no less than Goethe.
Above an hour I did not talk to him, but for an hour it was Goethe ...
I did it, because I felt that the boss feared a bit of my race - the innumerable ancestors who converge in me.
I wanted to prove that a yellow could save his armies.
In addition, I had to run away from the captain.
His hands and his voice could hit my door at any time.
I dressed without noise, I said goodbye in the mirror, I went down, scrutinized the quiet street and left.
The station did not disturb a lot of house, but I judged preferable to take a car.
I argued that thus ran less danger of being recognized; The fact is that in the deserted street I felt visible and vulnerable, infinitely.
I remember that I told the coachman who stopped a little before the central entrance.
I lowered voluntarily and almost painful; I went to the Ashgrove village, but I took out a passage for a more distant season.
The train came out within a few minutes, at eight and fifty.
I hurried; The next one would turn at nine thirty.
There was almost no one on the platform.
I traveled the cars: I remember some farmers, a mourning, a young man who read with fervor the annals of tacit, a wounded and happy soldier.
The cars started at last.
A man who recognized ran in vain to the limit of the platform.
It was Captain Richard Madden.
Annihilated, tremulous, I shrink at the other tip of the chair, away from the feared glass.
From this annihilation I went to an almost abject happiness.
I told myself that my duel was already committed and that I had won the first assault, when it was even for forty minutes, even for a favor of chance, the attack of my adversary.
I argue that this minimum victory prefigured the total victory.
I argued that it was not minimal, since without that precious difference that the train schedule brought me, I would be in jail, or dead.
Arguí (no less sophistically) that my cowardly happiness proved that I was a man capable of taking the adventure to fruition.
From that weakness I took forces that they did not abandon me.
I foresee that man will be resigned every day to more atrocious companies; Soon there will be no warriors and bandits; I give them this advice: "The executor of an atrocious company must imagine that he has already fulfilled it, a future must be imposed that is irrevocable as the past".
Thus I proceeded, while my eyes of man already dead recorded the fluence of that day that was perhaps the last, and the diffusion of the night.
The train ran with sweetness, between Fresnos.
He stopped, almost in the middle of the field.
Nobody shouted the name of the station.
"Ashgrove?" I asked some guys on the platform.
"Ashgrove," they answered.
I went down.
A lamp illustrated the platform, but the faces of the children remained in the shadow area.
One questioned me: "Do you go to. Doctor Stephen Albert's house?" Without awaiting reply, another said: "The house is far from here, but you will not be lost if you take that path to the left and every crossroads of the road bends to the left."
I threw a coin (the last one), I went down a stone steps and entered the lonely road.
This, slowly, went down.
It was elementary ground, up the branches were confused, the low and circular moon seemed to accompany me.
For a moment, I thought Richard Madden had painted my desperate purpose somehow.
Very soon I understood that this was impossible.
The advice of always turning on the left reminded me that such was the common procedure to discover the central courtyard of certain labyrinths.
Something I understand of labyrinths; Not in vain, I am a greatist of that Ts'ui Pên, who was governor of Yunnan and who resigned to temporary power to write a novel that was even more populous than the Hung Lu Meng and to build a labyrinth in which all men were lost .
Thirteen years old dedicated to those heterogeneys Fatigas, but the hand of a stranger murdered him and his novel was foolish and nobody found the labyrinth.
Under the English trees I meditated in that lost labyrinth: I imagined it inviolated and perfect at the secret summit of a mountain, I imagined it erased by rice paddies or under the water, I imagined it infinite, not of ochavated kiosks and ways that come back Rivers and Provinces and Realms ... I thought of a labyrinth of labyrinths, in a winding growing labyrinth that encompassed the past and future and that somehow would imply the stars.
Absorbed in those illusory images, I forgot my destiny of persecuted.
I felt, for an indeterminate time, abstract perceiver of the world.
The vague and alive field, the moon, the remains of the afternoon, they obrared in me; Also the decline that eliminated any possibility of fatigue.
The afternoon was intimate, infinite.
The road went down and bifurcated, between the already confusing meadows.
A sharp music and like Silábica approached and walked away in the wind swallow, fogged leaves and distance.
I thought that a man can be an enemy of other men, other moments of other men, but not from a country; Not of fireflies, words, gardens, water courses, weigners.
I arrived, well, a high rusty gate.
Between the bars I deciphe a mall and a kind of pavilion.
I understood, suddenly, two things, the first trivial, the second almost incredible: the music came from the pavilion, the music was China.
That is why I had accepted it completely, without paying attention.
I do not remember if there was a bell or a bell or if I called hitting my hands.
The sparkling of the music continued.
But from the bottom of the intimate house a lantern was approaching: a lantern that scratches and at times nullified trunks, a paper lantern, which had the shape of the drums and the color of the moon.
He was brought by a tall man.
I did not see his face, because he blinded me light.
He opened the gate and said slowly in my language: "I see that the pious HSI Pêng is committed to correcting my loneliness.
Would you definitely want to see the garden?
I recognized the name of one of our consuls and repeated bewildered: - Garden? -The
Garden of trails that are bifurcated.
Something stirred in my memory and pronounced with incomprehensible security: "The garden of my ancestor Ts'ui Pên.
- Your ancestor?
Your illustrious ancestor?
Go ahead.
The humid trail zigzagged as those of my childhood.
We arrived at a library of Oriental and Western books.
I recognized, bound in yellow silk, some handwritten volumes of the lost encyclopedia that directed the third emperor of the luminous dynasty and that did not ever be given to the printing press.
The gramophone disc rotated next to a bronze phoenix.
I also remember a vase of the pink family and another, former from many centuries, of that blue color that our architects copied from the Persian potters ...
Stephen Albert watched me, smiling.
It was (I already said it) very high, with sharp features, gray-eyed and gray beard.
Some priest was in him and also from marine; He then told me that he had been a missionary in Tientsin "before aspiring sinologist".
We sit; I in a long and under divan; He on his back to the window and a high circular watch.
I computed that before an hour I would not arrive, my persecutor, Richard Madden.
My irrevocable determination could wait.
"Takes t of Ts'ui Pên," said Stephen Albert.
Governor of his native province, learned in astronomy, in astrology and in the indefatigable interpretation of the Canonical Books, Ajedrecista, famous poet and calligrapher: everything left him to compose a book and a labyrinth.
He resigned to the pleasures of oppression, justice, of the numerous bed, banquets and even erudition, and climbed for thirteen years in the pavilion of the limpid loneliness.
At his death, the heirs found nothing but chaotic manuscripts.
The family, as you may not ignore, wanted to award them to the fire; But the executor of him (a Taoist or Buddhist monk) insisted on the publication.
"The blood of Ts'ui Pên," I replied, "we continue to execute that monk.
That publication was foolish.
The book is an undecided collection of contradictory drafts.
I have ever examined: in the third chapter the hero dies, in the room is alive.
As for the other company of Ts'ui Pên, to his labyrinth ... "Here is the labyrinth," he said, indicating a high lacquered desk.
-A ivory labyrinth!
-Exclame-.
A minimum labyrinth ... "A maze of symbols -corrged.
An invisible time maze.
To me, English Bárbaro, has been given to me to reveal that diaphanous mystery.
After more than a hundred years, the details are unrecoverable, but it is not difficult to conjecture what happened.
Ts'ui Pên would say once: "I retire to write a book."
And another: "I retire myself to build a labyrinth."
All imagined two works; No one pose that book and labyrinth were a single object.
The pavilion of the limpid loneliness stood in the center of a perhaps intricate garden; The fact may have suggested a physical labyrinth to men.
Ts'ui Pên died; No one, in the delayed lands that were his, gave with the labyrinth; The confusion of the novel suggested that this was the labyrinth.
Two circumstances gave me the line solution of the problem.
One: the curious legend that Ts'ui Pên had proposed a labyrinth to be strictly infinite.
Another: a fragment of a letter that I discovered.


Albert got up.
He gave me, for a moment, his back; She opened an aburese drawer and renegrated desk.
He returned with a paper before crimson; Now pink and tenuous and grid.
It was just the calligraphic renown of Ts'ui Pên.
I read with incomprehension and fervor these words that with a minutous brush wrote a man of my blood: "I leave the various PORTERS (not everyone) my garden of trails that are bifurcan."
Silently returned the sheet.
Albert continued: "Before exhusing this letter, I had asked me how a book can be infinite.
I do not conject another procedure than that of a cyclic, circular volume.
A volume whose last page was identical to the first, with the possibility of continuing indefinitely.
I also remembered that night that is in the center of a thousand and one nights, when Queen Shahrazad (for a magical distraction of the copyist) becomes a textually referring the story of a thousand and one nights, at risk of reaching the Night you say it, and so until infinity.
I also imagined a platonic, hereditary, transmitted from father to son, in which each new individual add a chapter or corrected with pious care the page of the elders.
Those conjectures distracted me; But none seemed to correspond, even in a remote way, to the contradictory chapters of Ts'ui Pên.
In that perplexity, they sent me from Oxford the manuscript that you have examined.
I stopped, as it is natural, in the phrase: "I leave the various PORTERS (not all) my garden of trails that are bifurcan."
Almost in the act I understood; The garden of trails that are bifurcated was the chaotic novel; The phrase "several porvenues (not all)" suggested the image of the bifurcation over time, not in space.
The general rereading of the work confirmed that theory.
In all fictions, each time a man faces various alternatives, opts for one and eliminates the others; In that of almost inextricable Ts'ui Pên, he opts-simultaneously- by all.
It creates, thus, various porvenues, various times, which also proliferate and bifurcan.
Hence the contradictions of the novel.
Fang, let's say, have a secret; A stranger knocks on the door of him; Fang solves killing him.
Naturally, there are several possible outcomes: Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill Fang, both can be saved, both can die, etcetera.
In the work of Ts'ui Pên, all the outcomes occur; Each is the starting point of other bifurcations.
Once, the trails of that labyrinth converge: for example, you get to this house, but in one of the possible past you are my enemy, in another my friend.
If you are resigned by my incurable pronunciation, we will read some pages.
His face, in the vivid circle of the lamp, was undoubtedly that of an old man, but with something unwavering and still immortal.
He read with slow precision two newsrooms from the same epic chapter.
In the first, an army marches towards a battle through a desert mountain; The horror of stones and shadow makes him despise his life and easily achieves victory; In the second, the same army crosses a palace in which there is a party; The resplendent battle seems to you a continuation of the party and achieve victory.
I heard with decent veneration those old fictions, perhaps less admirable that the fact that my blood had devised them and that a man of a remote empire restresses me, in the course of a desperate adventure, on a western island.
I remember the final words, repeated in each wording as a secret commandment: "Thus they fought the heroes, calm the admirable heart, violent the sword, resigned to kill and dying."
From that moment, I felt around and in my dark body an invisible, intangible pulming.
Not the pulming of the divergent, parallel and finally coalescentes armies, but a more inaccessible agitation, more intimate and that they somehow prefigured.
Stephen Albert continued: "I do not think that his illustrious ancestor idly played the variations.
I do not judge credible to sacrifice thirteen years to the infinite execution of a rhetorical experiment.
In his country, the novel is a subaltern genre; At that time it was a negligible genre.
Ts'ui Pên was a great novelist, but he was also a man of letters that certainly not considered a mere novelist.
The testimony of his contemporaries proclaimed - and fed up his life confirms - his metaphysical, mystical hobbies.
The philosophical controversy usurpa a good part of his novel.
I know that of all the problems, none worked and worked as the abysmal problem of time.
Now, that is the only problem that does not appear on the garden pages.
He does not even use the word he wants time.
How is you explained that volunteer omission?
I proposed several solutions; All, insufficient.
We discuss them; At last, Stepheri Albert told me: -In a riddle whose topic is chess, what is the only forbidden word?
I reflected a moment and reposed: -The word chess.
"Perrecisely," Albert said, "the garden of trails that are bifurcan is a huge riddle, or parable, whose theme is time; That recondite cause prohibits the mention of him.
Always omit a word, resort to inept metaphors and obvious periphrases, perhaps the most emphatic way of indicating it.
It is the tortuous mode that he preferred, in each of the meanders of his indefatigable novel, the oblique Ts'ui Pên.
I have confronted hundreds of manuscripts, I have corrected the mistakes that the negligence of the copyists has introduced, I have conjectured the plan of that chaos, I have restored, I have believed to restore the primordial order, I have translated the entire work: I know that it does not use a single Once the word time.
The explanation is obvious: the garden of trails that are bifurcan is an incomplete, but not false, universe image as it conceived Ts'ui Pên.
Unlike Newton and Schopenhauer, his ancestor did not believe in a uniform, absolute time.
He believed in infinite series of times, in a growing and dizzying network of divergent, convergent and parallel times.
That plot of approaching times, are bifurcated, cut or secularly ignored, covers all possibilities.
We do not exist in most of those times; In some there are you and not me; In others, me, do not you; In others, both.
In this one, that a favorable random holds me, you have come to my house; In another, you, when crossing the garden, has found me dead; In another, I say these same words, but I'm a mistake, a ghost.
"In all," I said not without a trembling, I appreciate and Venero his recreation of the Ts'ui Pên Garden.
"Not in everyone," he murmured with a smile.
Time is perpetually bifurized towards innumerable futures.
In one of them I am your enemy.
I returned to feel that pulming that I spoke.
I thought the humid garden surrounding the house was saturated until the infinite of invisible people.
Those people were Albert and I, secrets, busy and multiformes in other dimensions of time.
I raised my eyes and the tenuous nightmare dissipated.
In yellow and black garden there was only one man; But that man was strong as a statue, but that man was advancing on the path and was Captain Richard Madden.
"The future already exists," I answered, "but I am your friend.
Can I examine the letter again?
Albert got up.
High, opened the high desk drawer; He gave me his back for a moment.
I had prepared the revolver.
I shot with great care: Albert collapsed without a complaint, immediately.
I swear that his death was instantaneous: a glare.
The rest is unreal, insignificant.
Madden broke, arrested me.
I have been condemned to the gallows.
I have abominably defeated: I have communicated to Berlin the 9th Name of the city that they must attack.
Yesterday they bombed it; I read it in the same newspapers that proposed to England the enigma that the sage sinologist Stephen Albert died murdered by a stranger, and tsun.
The boss has deciphered that enigma.
He knows that my problem was to indicate (through the crash of war) the city called Albert and that I did not find another means to kill a person of that name.
He does not know (nobody can know) my innumerable contrition and fatigue.
1 Odious and bizarre hypothesis.
The Prussian spy Hans Rabener alias Viktor Runeberg assaulted with an automatic gun to the bearer of arrest warrant, captain Richard Madden.
This one, in self-defense, caused injury that determined his death.
(Editor's note.
)