Part I.
He cannot remember the name of the day nor is he able to place it in the month and year wherein God placed it. In fact he cannot even remember what time of the day it was exactly and can only give it approximately.
To the best of his belief, the time of day was either dawn or dusk. That is due to the fact that he remembers feeling a slightly cold breeze on his face, which the heat of the sun had not destroyed.
And that is likely because notwithstanding his ignorance as to whether it was light or Dark, he just remembers on leaving the house, meeting with soft, gentle, delicate light as though Darkness covered some of its edges.
Then that is also likely because he just seems to remember that when he met with this breeze and light he did not feel around him any great movement of people Stirling, but he only felt the movement of people waking up from sleep or settling down to it.
However, if there has remained to him any clear distinct memory of this time about which there is no cause to doubt, it is the memory of a fence which stood in front of him and was made of maize stems and which was only a few paces away from the door of the house.
He rememlers the fence as though he saw it only yesterday. He remembers that the stalks of which this fence was composed were taller than he was, and it was difficult for him to get to the other side of it.
He also recalls that the stalks of this fence were close together, as it were stuck together, so that he could not squeeze between them. He recollects too that the stalks of this fence stretched from his left to an ending he could not conjecture; and it stretched from his right to the end of the world in that direction. And the end of the world in this direction was near, for it reached as far as the canal, which fact he discovered when he got a little older. Now this played a great part in his life; or shall we say in his imagination?
All this he remembers, and he remembers how envious he was of the rabbits which used to go out of the house, just as he did, but were able to traverse the fence by. leaping over it or by squeezing between the stalks to where they could^nibble what was behind it in the way of greenstuffs, of which he remembers particularly the cabbage.
Then he remembers how he used to like to go out of the house at sunset when people were having their evening meal, and used to lean against the maize fence pondering deep in thought, until he was recalled to his surroundings by the voice of a poet who was sitting at some distance to his left, with his audience round him. Then the poet would begin to recite in a wonderfully sweet tone the doings of Abu Zaid, Khalifa and Diab, and his hearers would remain silent except when ecstasy enlivened them or desire startled them. Then they would demand a repetition and argue and dispute. And so the poet would be silent until they ceased their clamour after a period which might be short or long. Then he would continue his sweet recitation in a monotone.
He remembers too that whenever he went out at night to his place by the fence, there was always bitter grief in his soul because he knew only too well that his entertainment would be curtailed as soon as his sister called him to come indoors. He would refuse, and then she would come out and seize him by his clothes while he resisted with all his might. Then she would carry him in her arms as though he were a plaything and run with him to the place where she put him down to sleep on the ground, placing his head on the thigh of his mother, who turned her attention to his poor weak eyes, opening them one by one and pouring into them a liquid which hurt him but did no good at all. But although he felt the pain he did not complain or cry because he did not want to be a whimperer and a whiner like his little sister. Then he was carried to a comer of a small room and, his sister having laid him down to sleep on a mat on which had been spread an eiderdown, put another coverlet on top of him, and left him inwardly bemoaning his fate. Then he began to strain his hearing to its utmost, hoping that he might catch through the wall the sound of the sweet songs which the poet was reciting in the open air under the sky. Eventually sleep overcame him and he knew no more until he woke up when everybody was sleeping, his brothers and sisters stretched about him snoring loudly and deeply. He would throw the coverlet from his face in fear and hesitation because he hated to sleep with his face uncovered. For he knew full well if he uncovered his face in the course of the night or exposed any of the extremities of his body, they would be at the mercy of one,of the numerous evil sprites which inhabited every part of the house, filling every nook and cranny, and which used to descend under the earth as soon as ever the sun began to shine and folk began to stir; but when the sun sank to his lair and people retired to their resting-places, when lamps were extinguished and voices hushed, then these evil sprites would come up from under the earth and fill the air with hustle and bustle, whispering and shrieking. Often he would awake and listen to the answering crows of the cocks and the cackling of the hens and would try hard to distinguish between these various sounds, because sometimes it was really the cocks crowing, but at others it was the voices of the evil sprites assuming their shapes in order to deceive people and tease them. However he did not worry his head about these sounds or bother about them, because they came to him from afar, but what really did make him afraid were other sounds which he could only distinguish with the greatest effort, sounds which proceeded softly from the corners of the room. Some of them were like the hissing of a kettle boiling on the fire, others resembled the movement of light articles being moved from place to place, and again others sounded like the breaking of wood or the cracking of stems.
But his greatest terror of all was of persons who, in his imagination, stood in the doorway of the room and blocked it and began to make various noises something like the performances of dervishes at their religious exercises. Now he firmly believed that he had no protection from all these terrifying apparitions and horrible noises unless he wrapped himself up inside the coverlet from head to toe, without leaving any hole or crack between himself and the outer air, for he did not doubt but that if he left an aperture in the coverlet, the hand of an evil sprite would be stretched through it to his body and catch hold of him or poke him mischievously.
And so on account of these things he used to spend his nights in fear and trepidation unless he fell asleep; but he did not sleep very much. He used to wake up very early in the morning, or at any rate as soon as dawn broke, and he used to spend a great part of the night between these terrors and his fear of the evil sprites until at last he heard the voices of the women as they returned to their houses after filling their water jars at the canal, singing as they went 'Allah ya lail Allah' (My God! What a night! My God!). By this he knew that dawn had begun to peep and that the evil sprites had descended to their subterranean abodes. Then he himself was transformed into a sprite and began to talk to himself in a loud tone and to sing as much of the song of the poet (as he could remember) and to nudge his brothers and sisters who were lying around him until he had woken them up one by one. And when he had accomplished that, there was such a shouting and singing and hustle and bustle, a veritable babel, that was only restrained when the sheikh, their father, got up from his bed and called for a jug of water in order to wash himself before praying.
Then only were voices hushed and the movement quietened down until the sheikh had completed his religious ablutions, said his prayers, read a portion of the Quran, drunk his coffee and gone to his work. But as soon as ever the door closed behind him the whole family rose from their beds and ran through the house shouting and playing, scarcely distinguishable from the feathered and four-legged inhabitants of the house.

Part II.
He was convinced that the world ended to the right of him with the canal, which was only a few paces away from where he stood ... and why not? For he could not appreciate the width of this canal, nor could he reckon that this expanse was so narrow that any active youth could jump from one bank to the other. Nor could he imagine that there was human, animal and vegetable life on the other side of the canal just as much as there was on his side; nor could he calculate that a grown man could wade across this canal in flood without the water reaching up to his armpits; nor did he conjecture that from time to time there was no water in it. Then it would become a long ditch in which boys played and searched in the soft mud for such little fishes as had been left behind, and so had died when the water had been cut off.
None of these things did he ponder, and he was absolutely certain in his mind that this canal was another world quite independent of that in which he lived. A world that was inhabited by various strange beings without number, among which were crocodiles which swallowed people in one mouthful, and also enchanted folk who lived under the water all the bright day and during the Dark night. Only at dawn and dusk did they come up to the surface for a breath of air, and at that time they were a great danger to children and a seduction to men and women.
And among these strange creatures also were the long and broad fish which would no sooner get hold of a child than they would swallow him up; and in the stomachs of which some children might be fortunate enough to get hold of the signet-ring that would bring them to kingship. Now hardly had a man twisted this ring round his finger before two servants of the genie appeared in the twinkling of an eye to carry out his every wish. This was the very ring which Solomon wore and so subjected to his will genies, winds and every natural force he wished.
Now he liked nothing better than to go down to the edge of this canal in the hope that one of these fish would swallow him and so enable him to get possession of this ring in its stomach, for he had great need of it. ... Was he not ambitious at least to be carried across the canal by one of the genie's servants in order to see the wonders on the other side? On the other hand he shrank from the terrors he must undergo before he reached this blessed fish.
However, he was not able to explore along the bank of the canal for a great distance, inasmuch as both to right and to left the way was fraught with danger. For to his right lay the Aduites, people from Upper Egypt who lived in a big house and had two large dogs which were always on guard at the door of the house, barking incessantly. They were a by-word among the neighbours for ferocity, for a passer-by had only escaped from them with much difficulty and hardship.
And to the left were the tents of Said-al-Araby, about whose evil doings and cunning there was much gossip, as also about his blood-thirstiness. His wife, Kawabis, wore a great nose-ring and used to frequent the house and kiss our friend from time to time, causing him much pain and no small dismay by her nose-ring. And although he had the greatest dread of going to the right and encountering the two dogs of the Aduites, or of going to the left and encountering the evil of Said and his wife, Kawabis, still he used to find in every part of this somewhat limited and restricted world of his, various kinds of amusement and games, which would occupy the entire day.
The memory of children is indeed a strange thing, or shall we say that the memory of man plays strange tricks when he tries to recall the events of his childhood; for it depicts some incidents as clearly as though they had only happened a short time before, whereas it blots out others as though they had never passed within his ken.
For example, our friend remembers the fence and the cultivated land which lay alongside it and the canal which marked the end of the earth, and Said, and Kawabis and the Aduite dogs; but when he tries to recollect the passing of all these things he cannot grasp anything. It is just as though he went to sleep one night and woke up to find no sign of the fence or the field or Said or Kawabis. And lo! he saw in place of the fence and the field houses and well-ordered streets, all of which were on a slope stretching from north to south down to the embankment of the canal for a short distance. He remembers many of those who used to live in these houses, both men and women, and even the children who used to play in these streets.
Moreover, he remembers that he was able to explore boldly in both directions along the bank of the canal, without fear of the dogs of the Aduites or the cunning of Said and his wife; and he remembers how he used to spend many pleasant and happy hours every day on the canal bank listening to the songs of Hassan the Poet, who used to sing all about Abu Zaid, Khalifa and Diab while he was raising the water by means of a shaduf to irrigate his lands on the opposite bank. How more than once he was enabled to cross this canal on the shoulder of one of his brothers without recourse to the 'ring of kingship', and more than once he went to a place on the opposite side where stood some mulberry trees, of the delicious fruit of which he ate. How he more than once went along the bank of the canal to the right as far as the schoolmaster's orchard and not infrequently ate some apples there, and used to gather mint and basil, but he is totally at a loss to remember how this state of affairs changed and how the face of the earth was altered from its former appearance to this present one.

Part III.
He was the seventh of the thirteen children of his father, and the fifth out of the eleven children of his father's second wife. He used to feel that among this enormous number of youths and infants he had a special place distinct from his brothers and sisters. Did this position please him or did it annoy him? The truth is that he cannot definitely say, nor is he now able to form a correct judgement about it.
He experienced much tenderness and consideration from his mother, and from his father lenience and kindness, and his brothers he felt were somewhat reserved in their conversation and dealings with him. But he found side by side with this tenderness and consideration on the part of his mother a certain amount of negligence sometimes, and at others even harshness. And side by side with the lenience of his father he found a certain amount of negligence also, and even severity from time to time. Moreover, the reserve of his brothers and sisters pained him because he found therein a sympathy tainted with revulsion.
However, it was not long before he learnt the reason of all this, for he perceived that other people had an advantage over him and that his brothers and sisters were able to do things that he could not do and to tackle things that he could not. He felt that his mother permitted his brothers and sisters to do things that were forbidden to him. This aroused, at first, a feeling of resentment, but ere long this feeling of resentment turned to a silent, but heartfelt, grief when he heard his brothers and sisters describing things about which he had no knowledge at all.
Then he knew that they saw what he did not see.

Part IV.
He was from the outset of an inquisitive nature, regardless of what he encountered in the finding out of what he did not know, and that cost him much discomfort and trouble. But one incident in particular curbed his curiosity, and filled his heart with a shyness which lingers even yet.
He was sitting down to supper with his father and brothers, and his mother, as was her custom, was superintending the meal and directing the servant and her daughters, who were assisting the servant, in bringing the dishes required for the meal. And he was eating just as the others were eating, when a strange thought occurred to him ! What would happen if he took hold of a morsel of food with both hands instead of one as was customary? And what was there to prevent him from making this experiment? Nothing. Lo! he took a morsel in both hands. Then he raised it to his mouth.
At once his brothers burst out laughing. His mother was on the point of tears. His father said in a soft and sorrowful tone, That is not the way to eat your food, my son!' And he himself passed a troubled night. From that time his movements were fettered with infinite caution, fear and shyness. And thenceforth he realised that he had a strong will and also abstained from many kinds of food which he only allowed himself when he was over twenty-five years old. He gave up soup and rice, and all dishes which had to be eaten with spoons because he knew that he could not wield a spoon nicely, and so he didn't want his brothers to laugh at him, his mother to weep or his father to reproach him, albeit softly and sadly.
This incident helped him to understand correctly a traditional story about Abu-l-'Alā. They say that one day he was eating treacle, some of which, unbeknown to him, fell down the front of his garment. When he went out therefore to lecture to his students, one of them said to him, 'Sir, you have been eating treacle.' Abu-l-'Alā quickly put his hand on his chest and said 'Yes! God save us from gluttony!' Thereafter he gave up eating treacle for the rest of his life.
This incident also led him to appreciate more fully other actions of Abu-l-'Alā. For example he understood the reason why he used to eat unseen by anybody, not even his servant, and that he used to eat in a tunnel under the ground, ordering his servant to lay his meals there and then go away, so that he was left alone with his food and could eat it as he liked.
They also say that one day his students were talking about the melons of Aleppo and saying how excellent they were. Abu-l-'Alā took the trouble to send someone to Aleppo to buy some for them.
When the students ate, the servant kept a piece of melon for his master and put it in the tunnel. But it seems that he did not put it in the place where he usually put the old man's food, and, the latter not liking to ask for his share of the melon, it remained in that place until it went bad and he never tasted it at all.
Our friend understood completely these features of the life of Abu-l-'Alā, because therein he saw himself. How often as a child he used to long to be able to eat by himself, but he never Dared communicate this desire to his people. However, he was left alone with portions of the food frequently in the month of Ramadan8 and at the great festivals of the year, when his family used to partake of various kinds of sweet dishes, such as must be eaten with spoons. Then he used to refuse his portion of them at the table, and his mother, not liking this abstinence of his, would set aside for him a special dish and leave him alone with it in a special room in which he couM shut himself up so that nobody was able to see him while he ate.
When at length he reached years of discretion, he made this his general rule. He pursued this course of seclusion when he travelled to Europe for the first time, feigning fatigue and refusing to go to the dining-saloon on board ship, so that food was brought to him in his cabin. Then when he got to France, it was his rule on arrival at a hotel, or when staying with a family, that his food should be brought to him in his room without his bothering to go to the common dining-room. Nor did he abandon this habit until he got married, when his wife broke him of many habits he had grown into.
This incident, again, caused him many kinds of hardship. It made him a by-word among his family and those who knew him before he passed from family life into society.
He was a small eater, not because he had no great appetite, but because he had a horror of being called a glutton or of his brothers winking at one another on account of him. At first this caused him much pain, but it was not long before he got accustomed to it, so that he found it difficult to eat as others ate.
He used to take exceedingly small helpings of food. Now there was an uncle of his who was much vexed with him about it, whenever he saw it, and used to get enraged and rebuke him, urging him to take larger helpings; so that his brothers laughed. This caused him to hate his uncle with a deadly hatred.
He was ashamed to drink at table, fearing that the glass might upset in his hand or that he would take hold of it clumsily when it was handed to him. Therefore he always ate his food dry at the table until such time as he got up and went to wash his hands at the tap, drinking there to his heart's content. Now the water was not always clean, nor was this way of quenching his thirst beneficial to the health. So things went on until he got stomach trouble and no one was able to tell the reason of it.
Moreover, he abstained from all kinds of sports and games, except those which did not give him much trouble, and such as exposed him neither to ridicule nor to sympathy. His favourite was to collect a number of iron rods, take them to a quiet corner of the house, and then put them together, separate them and knock one against the other. Thus he would while away hours until he wearied of it. Then he would fall back on his brothers and friends, who were playing a game in which he would join with his mind but not with his hand. Like that he knew numerous games without ever taking part in them.
Now this abstention of his from play led him to become fond of one kind of diversion, and that was listening to stories and legends. His great delight was to listen to the songs of the bard or the conversation of his father with other men or of his mother with other women, and so he acquired the art of listening. His father and some of his friends were very fond of story-telling. As soon as ever they had finished their afternoon prayers they all collected round one of them, who would recite to them tales of raids and conquests, and of the adventures of Antarah and Zahir Baibars,4 and narratives about prophets, ascetics and pious folk; and he would read them books of sermons and the religious law.
Our friend would sit at a respectful distance from them, and although they were oblivious of his presence, he was in no way unmindful of what he heard or even of the impression these stories made upon the audience. So it was that when the sun set, people went to their food, but as soon as they had said their evening prayers they assembled again and conversed for a great part of the night. Then came the bard and began to recite the deeds of the Hilalies and Zanaties to him, and our friend would sit listening during the early part of the night just as he did toward the close of the day.
The women in the villages of Egypt do not like silence, nor have they any talent for it, so that if one of them is by herself and cannot find anyone to talk she will divert herself with various kinds of speech; if glad, she will sing, and if she is sad by reason of bereavement she will lament the deceased; for every woman in Egypt can mourn when she wishes. Best of all when they are by themselves do the village women like to recall their troubles and eulogise those who have departed this life and very often this eulogising causes them to shed real tears.
Our friend was the happiest of mortals when he was listening to his sisters singing or his mother lamenting. However, the song of his sisters used to annoy him and left no impression on him because he found it inane and pointless, without rhyme or reason, whereas the lamentations of his mother used to move him very much and often reduced him to tears. Somewhat after this fashion our friend learnt by heart many songs, many lamentations and many tales both serious and amusing. He learnt something else which had no connection at all with this, to wit passages of the Quran which his old blind grandfather used to recite morning and evening.
This grandfather of his was to him an unattractive and odious person, who used to spend every winter at the house. He became pious and ascetic when life drove him to it, and so he used to pray the regular five times a day and the mention of God was incessantly on his tongue. He would get up toward the end of the night in order to recite the collect for the dawn and would sleep at a belated hour after the evening prayer and recite all manner of collects and prayers.
Now our friend slept in a room adjoining that of the old man and thus could hear him intoning and learn by heart what he intoned, so that he memorised a great number of these collects and prayers.
Moreover, the people of the village were very fond of Sufism5 and used to perform the zikr. Our friend liked this propensity of theirs because he enjoyed the zikr and the incantations of the chanters during it.
So it was that before he was nine years old he had accumulated a very fair collection of songs, lamentations, stories, poems about the Hilalies and Zanaties, collects, prayers and dervish incantations, and learnt them by heart, and in addition to all that he had learnt the Quran.

Part V.
Strange to relate, he does not know how he memorised the Quran, nor how he began it, nor how he went over it a second time, although of his life in the village school he remembers numerous episodes, many of which make him laugh even now, while others sadden him.
He recalls the time when he used to go to school carried on the shoulder of one of his brothers because the school was a long way away and he was too weak to go such a distance on foot.
He cannot remember, either, when he began to go to the village school. He sees himself in the early part of the day sitting on the ground in front of 'Our Master', surrounded by a collection of shoes, with some of which he was playing, and he remembers how patched they were. Now 'Our Master' sat on a small, wooden dais that was neither particularly high nor particularly low; it stood on the right of the door as you came in, so that everyone who entered passed 'Our Master'. As soon as 'Our Master' entered the school, it was his custom to take off his cloak, or more accurately his overcoat, and having rolled it up into the shape of a cushion he put it on his right side. Then he would take off his shoes and, sitting cross-legged on his dais, light a cigarette and begin to call the roll.
Now 'Our Master' never discarded his shoes until it was absolutely necessary. He used to patch them on the right side and on the left and on the top and the bottom. Whenever one of his shoes needed patching he would call one of the boys of the school, and taking the shoe in his hand say to him, 'You will go to the cobbler who lives near by and say to him, "Our Master says that this shoe needs a patch on the right side. Look, do you see? Here where I put my finger." The cobbler will reply, "Yes I will patch it." Then -you will say to him, "Our Master says that you must choose a strong, coarse, new piece of leather and that you must put it on neatly so that it is invisible or nearly so." He will reply, "Yes I will do that." Then you will say to him, "Our Master says that he is an old customer of yours, so please take that into account," and whatever he says to you don't agree to pay more than a piastre. Now go and come back again in the twinkling of an eye.'
So the boy would depart and 'Our Master' would forget all about him. By the time that he did return, 'Our Master' would have twinkled his eye times without number.
Nevertheless, although this man opened and shut his eye, he could not see anything, or at any rate very little, for he was completely blind except for the faintest glimmer of sight in one eye, so that he could discern shapes without being able to distinguish between them. Not but what he was very pleased with this dim sight of his, and deceived himself into imagining that he could see as well as other people. However, this did not prevent him from relying on two of his pupils to guide him on his way to and from the school, putting an arm on the shoulder of each.
Thus they would proceed three abreast along the street, which they occupied to the detriment of other pedestrians, who had to make way for them. Strange indeed was the sight of 'Our Master' on his way to the school or his house in the morning and evening. He was a bulky, corpulent man and his overcoat increased his bulk. As we mentioned above he put his arms over the shoulders of his two companions, and as the three of them marched along, the earth resounded beneath their tread.
Now 'Our Master' used to choose the most intelligent of his pupils, and those with the best voices, for this important task. This was because he was fond of singing and liked to give singing lessons to his pupils. He would deliver his lesson to them all along the street. Thus he would sing, and at times his companions would begin to accompany him (in song) or merely listen to him at others; or one of them he would charge to sing, and 'Our Master' and his other companion would accompany him.
'Our Master' did not sing with his voice and tongue alone, but with his head and body also. He used to nod his head up and down and waggle it from side to side. Moreover he sang with his hands also, beating time upon the chests of his two companions with his fingers. Sometimes when the song was particularly agreeable to him, and he found that walking did not suit him, he would stop till it was finished. The best of it was that 'Our Master' thought he had a very beautiful voice, though our friend does not think that God ever created an uglier voice than his.
Whenever he read the verse: 'Verily the most unpleasant sound is the braying of asses,' he invariably thought of 'Our Master' while he was beating time to the verses of the Al-Burda on his way to the mosque to pray at noon or on his way home to the house from the school.
Our friend pictures himself, as described above, sitting on the ground playing with the shoes around him, while 'Our Master' hears him recite Surat-ar-Rahman, but he cannot remember whether he was reciting it for the first time or the second.
Indeed on another occasion he sees himself sitting not on the floor among the shoes, but on the right of 'Our Master' on another long dais, and the latter is hearing him recite: 'Do ye enjoin good works on others and yourselves forget to do them? Do ye read the book and then do not understand?' To the best of his belief he had finished reciting the Quran through once and was beginning to do it a second time.
It is not to be wondered at that our friend forgets how he learnt the Quran, since at the time of its completion he was not nine years old. He remembers very clearly the day on which he concluded his study of the Quran, and 'Our Master' telling him some days before, how pleased his father would be with him and how he would make his stipulations for it and demand his past dues. For had he not taught four of our friend's brothers before him, of whom one had gone to Al-Azhar and the others to various schools? So that our friend was the fifth.... Did 'Our Master' not have many claims upon the family?
These claims 'Our Master' always detailed in terms of food, drink, clothes and money.
The first of all of these dues, of which he would demand payment, when our friend had finished the Quran, would be a rich supper; then a gown and caftan, a pair of shoes, a Maghraby tarbush,8 a cotton cap of the material of which turbans are made and a golden guinea he would not be satisfied with anything less than that... if they did not pay him all this, he would disown the family and would not take anything from them. Nor would he have any more to do with them. This he swore with the most binding oaths.
It was Wednesday, and 'Our Master' had announced in the morning that our friend would conclude the Quran that day. They set forth in the afternoon, 'Our Master' leading the way supported by his two companions, and behind him our friend, led by one of the orphans in the village. At last they reached the house and 'Our Master' gave the door a push and uttering the customary cry 'Ya Sattar' (0 Veiler), made his way to the guest-room, where was the sheikh, who had just finished his afternoon prayers and was reciting some private prayers as was his wont. He greeted them smilingly and confidently. His voice was soft and that of 'Our Master' raucous. Meanwhile our friend said nothing and the orphan was smiling from ear to ear.
The sheikh signed to 'Our Master' and his two companions to be seated, and placed a silver coin in the orphan's hand. Then having called the servant and bidden him take the orphan to a place where he would find something to eat, he patted his son on the head and said 'May God open his ways to you! Go and tell your mother that "Our Master" is here.'
His mother must have heard the voice of 'Our Master', for she had prepared such things as were necessary for an occasion like this: a tall and wide mug of unadulterated sugared water. It was brought to 'Our Master' and he gulped it down. His two companions also drank two mugs of sugared water. Then coffee was brought and then 'Our Master' urged the sheikh to examine the lad in the Quran, but the sheikh replied 'Leave him to play. He is yet young.' 'Our Master' got up to go, whereupon the sheikh said "We will say the sunset prayer together, if God wills,' which was of course an invitation to supper.
I cannot recollect that 'Our Master' received any other reward in return for our friend completing the Quran, for he had known the family twenty years and received presents from them regularly, and did not stand on ceremony with them. Indeed he was confident that if he was unlucky with the family this time, he would not be so unlucky some other time.