Part I.
He does not mention a name for this day, and he cannot place it where God placed it in the month and year. Rather, he cannot mention a specific time from this day, but rather bring it closer.
The most he thought was that this time of that day occurred at dawn or at dinner.
This is likely because he remembers that his face at that time received air that contained something of a light cold, which did not take away the heat of the sun.
This is likely because despite his ignorance of the reality of light and darkness, he almost remembers that when he left the house, he received a soft, light, gentle light, as if darkness covered some of his edges.
Then he makes it more likely because he almost remembers that when he received this air and this light, he did not make those around him feel a strong waking movement, but rather a movement awakened from sleep or approaching him.
And if he had left from this time a clear and clear memory about which there is no way to doubt, it is the memory of this fence that was standing in front of him of reeds, and which was between it and the door of the house only short steps.
He remembers this fence as if he saw it yesterday.
It is mentioned that the reeds of this fence were longer than his height, and it was difficult for him to cross it beyond.
It is mentioned that the reeds of this fence were close together, as if they were close together, and he could not slip through it.
It is mentioned that the reeds of this fence used to extend from its north to where the end is not known, and it used to extend from its right to the end of the world from this side.
The end of the world in this respect was close, for it was ending in a channel that he knew when he was old, and it had a great influence in his life - or say in his imagination -.
 He mentions all of this, and he mentions that he was envious of the rabbits that used to come out of the house as well as he does, and cross the fence by leaping over it, or flowing between its canes, to where they gnaw the green plants behind it, especially cabbage.
Then he mentions that he liked to leave the house when the sun set and people had dinner, so he relied on the cane of this fence, thinking deeply, until he was brought back to what was around him, the poet’s voice had sat at a distance from his north, and people gathered around him and began to sing to them in a strange sweet tone The news of Abi Zaid And the successor of Diab, and they are silent except when the rapture makes them belittle them or they are provoked by lust, so they recover, contend and quarrel, and the poet is silent until they are relieved of their wrath after a short or long time, then he resumes his sweet singing with his tone that hardly changes.
Then he mentions that he does not go out one night to his position by the fence without making himself a bitter heartbreak, because he was able to interrupt him from listening to the poet’s anthem when his sister calls him to enter, and he refuses, so she comes out and pulls him from his dress, and he refrains from her, and she carries him in her arms as if he is a thumper, and runs him to where she sleeps. On the ground and put his head on his mother's thigh, then this is intended for his dark eyes, and she opens them one after the other, and drips in them a liquid that harms him and does not do him any good, and he is in pain, but he does not complain or cry because he hated being like his little sister crying and complaining. Then he is moved to a corner in a small room, so his sister sleeps on a mat on which a quilt has been spread, and she throws another quilt on him, and she leaves him, though in his soul, he sighs, and he extends his hearing to an extent that almost pierces the wall, perhaps he can reach him with these sweet tones that the poet repeats in the open air under the sky.
Then sleep overtakes him, and he only feels that he has woken up while people are asleep, and his brothers and sisters are covered, and they rush into the snoring.
And he was sure that if he exposed his face during the night or took one of his limbs out of the quilt, he would surely be tampered with by one of the many demons that inhabited the regions of the house and filled its parts and areas, and which would descend underground as long as the sun lit up and the people were disturbed.
When the sun goes to its cave, people go to their beds, lights are extinguished, and the voices are quiet, these goblins will rise from under the earth and fill the space with movement, turmoil, whispering and shouting.
 He would often wake up and hear the response of roosters and the crowing of chickens, and he would strive to distinguish between these different sounds.
He did not pay any attention to these sounds or fear them, because they were reaching him from afar, but he was afraid of all other sounds that he could not discern except with hardship and effort. Light that is moved from one place to another, and some represent wood that breaks or a stick that breaks.
He was most afraid of people imitating her who had stood at the door of the room and blocked it, and began to make different movements similar to the movements of the Sufis in the circles of remembrance.
He believed that he had no protection from all these frightening ghosts and reprehensible sounds, except to wrap himself in his quilt from head to toe, without leaving an opening or gap between it and the air.
And he was confident that if he left a gap in his quilt, the hand of an imp would have to extend from it to his body, so that he could wink and play around with it.
 So he spent the night frightened and restless; Except when he fell asleep, and he slept only a little.
He used to get up early, or say he would wake up in magic, and spend a long part of the night in these horrors and fear of demons, until if he heard the voices of women returning to their homes and they filled their jars from the canal singing "Oh God, night of God..." he knew that The dawn had broken, and the goblins had descended to their resting place from the lower earth, so he became a goblin, and began to speak to himself in a loud voice, sing what he had memorized from the poet's anthem, and wink at his brothers and sisters around him, until he awoke them one by one.
If this is done to him, there is shouting and singing, and there is noise and tumult, and there is a noise that he did not put an end to except for the sheikh getting up from his bed, and his supplication with the jug to perform ablution.
 At that time, the voices subside and the movement calms down, until the Sheikh performs ablution, prays, reads his reply, drinks his coffee, and goes to work.
If the door is closed without him, the whole group gets up from the bed, and swarms into the house, shouting and playing, until it mingles with the birds and livestock in the house.
Part II.

 He was confident that the world would end on his right by this channel, which was only a few steps between him and it....
Why not?
He did not see the width of this canal, and he did not appreciate that this width is so small that an energetic young man can jump from one edge and reach the other, and he did not appreciate that the life of people, animals and plants are connected from behind this canal as they are without it, and he did not appreciate A man can cross this canal full without water reaching his armpits, and he was not able to cut off the water from time to time from this canal, so it was a rectangular hole in which the boys tampered, and they searched in its soft ground for the small fish left behind, and he died because the water was cut off from him.
 He did not appreciate all of this, but he knew with certainty and did not confuse him that this channel was another world independent of the world in which he was living, inhabited by countless different strange creatures; Among them are the crocodiles that scorn people, and among them are the enchanted people who live under water, the whiteness of the day and the blackness of the night, so that when the sun rises or sets, they float and breathe the air, and when they float, they are dangerous for children and a temptation for men and women.
And among them are these long, curvy fish that hardly ever get a child until you scorn him, and which may allow some children to get the king’s seal in their bellies, that ring that a person can hardly turn on his finger until he seeks it without a blink of an eye, two servants from the jinn who spend for him what he wants, that The ring that Solomon used to seal, so that the jinn, the wind, and whatever forces of nature he wanted mocked him.
He would not have liked to land in this channel, perhaps one of these fish would cherish him, and he would get this ring in its belly, for he needed it greatly... Was he not aspiring, at the very least, that one of these two servants would carry him beyond this channel to see some of the marvels there ?
But he was very afraid of the horrors before he reached this blessed fish.
 He could not, however, swim a great distance from the shore of this canal, for this shore was fraught with danger to his right and to his north.
As for his right, there were the Adonis, a people from Upper Egypt who lived in a large house of theirs, at its door always standing two great dogs whose barking never ceases, and people’s conversations about them do not cease, and those who pass by them do not escape except after hardship and hardship.
As for his left, there were tents in which “Saeed Al-Arabi” lived, who was talking about his evil, cunning, and eagerness to shed blood, and his wife, “Kawabis,” who had a large gold ring in her nose, which differed to the house, and he accepted our friend from time to time. When, afflicted by her daffodils and terrified him.
The most feared thing to him was that he would advance to his right and be exposed to the two dogs of Adawiyyin, or he would advance to his left and be exposed to the evil of “Saeed” and his wife “Kawabis.”
However, he used to find in this narrow, short, and limited world in every aspect, forms of amusement and absurdity that filled his whole day.
 But the memory of children is strange, or say that a person’s memory is strange when you try to review childhood incidents, as it represents some of these incidents clearly and clearly as if nothing had elapsed between them and him, and then erased others from them as if there was no covenant between them and him.
 Our friend mentions the fence and the farm that was spreading behind it, and the canal to which the world ended, and Saeed, Kawabis and the dogs of Al-Adawiyyin.
It is as if he had slept one night and then woke up. He did not see a fence, nor a farm, nor happiness, nor nightmares. Rather, he saw the place of the fence and the farm, standing houses and organized streets, all descending from the canal bridge extending a short stretch from north to south, and he remembers many of those who inhabited these Homes, men and women, and children who were messing around in these streets.
 He mentions that he could advance right and left on the shore of the canal without fearing the dogs of the Adonis or the deceptions of Said and his wife.
He remembers that he used to spend hours of his day on the shore of the canal happily and jubilantly, when he heard the melodies of “Hassan,” the poet sing his poetry about Abi Zayd, Khalifa and Diab, when he raised the water with his shadouf to irrigate his crops on the other shore of the canal.
He mentions that he was able more than once to cross this canal on the shoulder of one of his brothers without needing the king's ring, and that he went more than once to where there were berry trees behind the canal, and he ate delicious fruits from its berries.
He remembers that he moved more than once to his right on the shore of the canal until he reached the teacher’s garden and ate apples there more than once, and more than once mint and basil were picked for him.
But he is completely unable to remember how the situation became impossible and the face of the earth changed from its first phase to this new phase.
Part III.

 He was the seventh of his father's thirteen children, and the fifteenth of his siblings.
He felt that he had a special place among this huge number of young people and children, distinguished from that of his brothers and sisters.
Was this place satisfied?
Was he hurting him?
The truth is that this can only be clarified through ambiguity and vagueness, and the truth is that he cannot now make an honest judgment on that.
He felt mercy and compassion from his mother, and he found softness and kindness from his father, and he felt some caution from his brothers in their speaking to him and their treatment of him.
But besides this mercy and sympathy on the part of his mother, he found some carelessness at other times, and harshness at other times.
In addition to this gentleness and kindness from his father, he also found some negligence and falsifications from time to time.
The caution of his brothers and sisters was hurting him, because he found in him a kind of sympathy tinged with a kind of contempt.
 However, it was not long before the reason for all of this became clear, as he felt that other people had a preference over him, and that his brothers and sisters could do what he could not, and they would rise from the matter when he could not.
And he felt that his mother would give his brothers and sisters permission to do things that she forbade him, and that was keeping him safe.
But this outrage soon turned into a deep silent sadness, for he heard his brothers describing what he was not aware of, so he knew that they see what he does not see.
Part IV.

 From the very beginning of his command, he was on a journey, not caring about what was thrown at him, in order to explore what he did not know.
It cost him a lot of pain and trouble.
But one incident limited his inclination to curiosity, and filled his heart with a shyness that has not left him until now.
He was sitting at dinner between his brothers and his father, and his mother, as usual, was supervising the dinner party, instructing the servant and instructing his sisters, who were with the servant, in doing what the feeders needed.
And he ate as people eat.
But for something strange thought occurred to him!
What happens if he takes the bite with both hands instead of taking it as usual with one hand?
What prevents him from this experience?
Nothing, and so he took the morsel with both hands and dipped it from the common plate and then raised it to his mouth.
As for his brothers, they drowned in laughter.
As for his mother, she cried.
And as for his father, he said in a quiet, sad voice, "What is this way to take a bite, my son?" …
As for him, he did not know how he spent his night.
 From that time on, his movements were bound by a measure of calmness, compassion, and boundless shyness.
And from that time he knew for himself a strong will.
From that time on, he forbade himself various types of food that were not permitted to him until after he had passed twenty-five.
He forbade himself soup, rice, and all colors that are eaten with spoons, because he knew that he could not make a spoon, and he hated his brothers laughing, his mother crying, or his father teaching him in a sad calm.
 This incident helped him to truly understand what the narrators were talking about on the authority of Abu Al-Ala that he ate some molasses one day, and some of it fell on his chest without knowing. “Yes, the Gluttonous God Slayer!”
Then he forbade molasses on himself for the rest of his life.
 This incident helped him to understand one of the phases of Abu Al-Ala correctly, because Abu Al-Ala used to conceal his food even from his servant, as he used to eat in an underground tunnel, and he would order his servant to prepare his food for him in this tunnel and then go out, and he was alone to his food and take what he desires.
They claimed that his disciples once studied the watermelon of Aleppo and its quality, so Abu Al-Ala asked and sent to Aleppo someone who bought them something from him, so they ate and the servant kept some watermelon for his master and put it in the tunnel, as if he had not put it in the place where he used to put the Sheikh’s food, and the Sheikh hated to ask About his share of watermelon, so the watermelon stayed in place until it became rotten and the sheikh did not taste it.
Our friend understood these phases of Abu Al-Ala's life correctly, because he saw himself in them.
How much he wished for a child if he could be alone with his food, but he did not dare to announce this desire to his family.
However, it is often empty for some food, and that is during the month of Ramadan and during the busy seasons.
When his family used to take sweet foods, but they were eaten with spoons; He refused to hit them on the table.
And his mother hated this deprivation for him, so she set aside a special plate for him and kept him and him in a special room, which he closed without him so that no one could supervise him while he was eating.
 However, when he was able to control himself, he made this plan a system for him.
He started doing this when he traveled to Europe for the first time, so he became tired and refused to go to the ship's table, so he carried food to him in his room.
Then he arrived in France, and his rule, if he stayed in a hotel or in a family, was to bring him food in his room without the cost of going to the public table.
He did not abandon this habit until he proposed to his wife, and she took him out of many habits he had become familiar with.
 This incident took him in many colors of distress in his life, making him an example in the family and among those who knew him when he transcended family life to social life; He ate little, not because he had little inclination to eat, but because he was afraid of being called evil or of being winked at by his brothers.
It hurt him at first, but it was not long before she got used to it that it became difficult for him to eat as people eat.
He was extravagant in minimizing the bite, and he had an uncle who angered him with him whenever he saw him, so he became angry and rebuked him and insisted on him to enlarge the bite, so his brothers laughed.
This was the reason why he hated his uncle so much.
He was ashamed to drink at the table for fear that the cup would shake from his hand, or that he would not eat it well when it was served to him, so his food was dry as he did not sit at the table, even if he got up to wash his hands from the tap that was there, he drank from its water what God wanted him to drink, and he did not This water was always pure, and this kind of thirst-quenching was not good for health, so he ended up being baptized, and no one could know why.
 Then he forbade himself from all kinds of play and tampering with everything, except that which does not burden him and does not expose him to laughter or pity.
He loved playing with him to gather a group of iron and take a corner of the house with it, gather them and separate them and knock each other, spending hours on that, even when he got tired of standing on his brothers or his relatives while they were playing, he participated in playing with his mind not his hand.
He also knew most of the colors of playing without taking them by luck.
This turning away from frivolity endeared him to a kind of amusement. He listened to stories and hadiths, and the most beloved thing to him was to hear the poet’s chanting, or the talk of men to his father, and women to his mother.
Hence, learn to listen well.
His father and a group of his companions loved stories very much, and when they prayed the afternoon prayer, they gathered to one of them, reciting to them the stories of the conquests and conquests, the news of Antara and Al-Zahir Baybars, the news of the prophets, hermits and the righteous, and books on preaching and Sunnah.
And our friend was sitting among them, the dog taunted, and they were unaware of him, but he was not unaware of what he hears, rather he was not unaware of what these stories leave in the hearts of the listeners of the trail, and when the sun sets, the people disperse to their food, until when they pray dinner they gather and talk part of the night, and accept The poet began to sing to them the news of the Hilaliyids and the Zenites, and our companion was sitting, listening at the beginning of the night as he used to hear at the end of the day.
 The women in the villages of Egypt do not like silence and are not inclined to it; If one of them is alone with herself and does not find anyone to talk to, she talks to herself in various ways, and she sings if she is happy, and enumerates if she is sad.
Every woman in Egypt is sad when she wants.
The most beloved thing to the women of the villages, if they are alone with themselves, is to mention their pain and their death, and then they enumerate them, and often this enumeration ends in tears. Our friend was the happiest of people by listening to his sisters singing, and to his mother while she was several.
The singing of his sisters vexed him and left no trace in him; because he found it absurd and implying nothing; While the number of his mother shook him violently, and often cried.
In this way, our friend memorized many songs, many narrations, many serious stories and jokes, and he memorized something else that was not related to all of this. These are the verses that his grandfather, the blind sheikh, recited in the morning or evening.
 His grandfather was heavy in shade and hated him, and he used to spend the winter at home every year, and he had made peace and rituals when life forced him to righteousness and rituals, so he would pray the five at the times, and his tongue did not falter in the remembrance of God.
He would get up at the end of the night to read “Ward of Magic” and he would sleep late after the evening prayer and recite different kinds of wirds and supplications.
Our friend used to sleep in a room next to this sheikh’s room, so he could hear him reciting, and he used to memorize what came after until he memorized a lot of these verses and supplications.
The people of the village loved mysticism and remembrances, and our friend loved them, because he was playing with this remembrance, and what the vocalists sang during it.
He did not reach the age of nine until he was conscious of songs, enumerations, stories, poetry of Al-Hilaliyyin, Al-Zanatiyyin, wirds, supplications and Sufi chants as a whole, and to all that he memorized the Qur’an.
Part V.
But he does not know how to memorize the Qur’an, nor does he remember how he started it, nor how he repeated it, although he mentions from his life in the book many situations, some of which make him laugh now, and some of which grieve him; He remembers times when he would go to the book on the shoulder of one of his two brothers, because the book was far away, and because he was too weak to walk that distance.
Then he does not remember when he began to seek writers.
He sees himself in the morning sitting on the ground in the hands of "our master" and around him a group of slippers; He was fiddling with some of them, remembering the patches he had attached to them.
“Our Master” was sitting on a small wooden bench, not high or low, which was placed to the right of the inside of the Kitab’s door, so that everyone inside would pass through “Our Master.”
Whenever the scribe entered, “our master” would return to take off his cloak, or more accurately, his “duff” and wrap it in a wrap that made it into the shape of a pillow and put it on his right, then take off his sandals and perch on his bench, light his cigarette, and start calling names.
Our master would not release his shoes unless he could find something to do with that. He would patch them from the right, from the left, from above and from below.
And if one of his sandals was vacated with him, he called one of the boys of the cape and took the sandal in his hand and said to him, “You go to Al-Hazaen, and he is here near, and you say to him: “Our master tells you that these sandals need a tonsil from the right side.”
See see?
Here is where I put my finger, so the sad person says to you: “Yes, I will put this almond.” You say to him: “Our master tells you: You must choose a new thick, firm skin, and improve the patches so that they do not appear, or so that they hardly appear.”
He says to you: “Yes, I will do this.” You say to him: “And our master says to you: He has been your client for a long time, so recommend the reward well.”
 The boy goes away and our master plays with him, then he returns while our master closes his eyes and opens it again and again.
However, the man could close his eyes and open them without seeing or almost seeing anything, for he was blind except for a very small glimmer of light in one of his eyes, representing ghosts to him without being able to distinguish them.
And the man was happy with this little glimmer... He was deceiving himself and thinking that he was one of the sighted... But that did not prevent him from relying on two of his disciples on his way to the book and to the house, spreading his arms on the shoulders of each of them, and the three walking on the road like this!
They took her to passers-by, so that they would resign themselves to her.
 And the sight of our master was astonishing, on his way to the book and to the house, in the morning and in the evening. He was very large, and his dwarf was exceedingly large, and, as before, he spread his arms on the shoulders of his two companions.
The three of them were walking and they would hit the ground with their feet.
And our master was choosing among his disciples for this task, he gave birth to them and the best of them in voice; Because he loved to sing, and he loved to teach his students to sing, and he would choose the way for this lesson.
He used to sing and take his two companions to accompany him sometimes, and to listen to him at other times, or he would take one of them to sing along with him and the other companion.
Our master did not sing with his voice and tongue alone, but he sang with his head and body as well, so his head was going down and up, and his head was turning right and left.
Our master was also singing with his hands.
He would sign melodies on his companion's chest with his fingers.
Our master sometimes liked the role; And he sees that walking does not suit him, so he stands until it is completed.
The best thing about all of this was that our master saw his beautiful voice.
Our friend does not think that God created a voice uglier than his own.
And our friend did not read the words of God Almighty, “The most ignorant of sounds is the sound of donkeys” except the mention of our master as he signed verses from “Al-Burdah” on his way to the mosque setting out for the noon prayer, or on his way home leaving from the kebab.
 Our friend sees himself as we have presented, sitting on the ground fiddling with sandals around him, and our master is reciting Surat al-Rahman to him, but he does not remember whether he is reading it at the beginning or at repeat.
 It is as if he sees himself again sitting, neither on the ground nor between the shoes, but to the right of our master on another long bench, and our master is reading to him: “Do you command people to righteousness and you forget yourselves, and you are following the Qur’an?
It is not strange for our friend to forget how he memorized the Qur’an, for he completed it and when he was nine years old.
And he clearly and clearly mentions that day on which he sealed the Qur’an, because our master was talking to him days before this day about sealing the Qur’an, and that his father would rejoice in it.
He was setting conditions for that and demanding his rights.
Did he not know before our friend four of his brothers, one of whom went to Al-Azhar, the others to schools, and our friend is the fifth.... How many rights does our master have over the family!
And the rights of our master over the family were always represented in food, drink, clothes and money.
As for the rights that he would require if our friend sealed the Qur’an, he would have a rich meal first, then a robe, a kaftan, a pair of shoes, a Moroccan fez, and a cap made of cloth from which turbans are used, and a red pound, he would not accept anything other than that... If all this does not lead to him, he does not know the family. He does not accept anything from her, and there is no connection between him and her, and he swears by the embarrassing oaths.
This day was a Wednesday.
Our master had foretold in the morning that our friend would complete the Qur'an on this day.
And they came in the age; Our master walks relying on his two companions, and our friend walks behind him, led by an orphan from the village.
Even when they reached the house, our master pushed the door, and shouted his usual cry: “Oh, Star.” He went to the scene and found that the sheikh had twisted from the afternoon prayer while he was reciting some of the supplications as usual. Our friend said nothing, and the orphan was cheerful.
The Sheikh sat our master and his two companions, and put a piece of silver in the orphan’s hand, and called the servant and commanded him to take this orphan to where he would get something of food, and wiped his son’s head and said, “God opened for you, go to your mother, and tell her that our master is here.”
And his mother had heard our master's voice, and she had prepared for him what was necessary at this time, a huge tall cup of melted sugar that had nothing on it.
He brought out this cup to our master, and he filled it up in awe, and his two companions drank two cups of melted sugar as well.
Then I took out the coffee and our master drank it with the sheikh.
Our master was urging the sheikh to test the boy for what he had memorized from the Qur’an, and the sheikh would answer, “Let him play, because he is young.”
Then our master got up to leave, and the sheikh told him, "Let us pray Maghrib together, God willing."
This was the invitation to dinner.
And I don't think that our master would have received anything else as a reward for our friend's seal of the Qur'an. He had known the family for twenty years, and he had uncut habits, and the cost between him and it was high, and he was confident that if luck missed him with her this time, he would not miss him again.