On page 22 of Liddell Hart's History of the European War, one reads that an offensive by thirteen British divisions (supported by fourteen hundred artillery pieces) against the Serre Montauban line had been planned for July 24, 1916 and it had to be postponed until the morning of the twenty-ninth.
Torrential rains (captain Liddell Hart notes) caused this delay - nothing significant, by the way.
The following statement, dictated, reread, and signed by Dr. Yu Tsun, former Professor of English at Tsingtao Hochschule, sheds an unexpected light on the case.
The first two pages are missing.
...and hung up the tube.
Immediately afterwards, I recognized the voice that had answered in German.
It was Captain Richard Madden's.
Madden, in Viktor Runeberg's apartment, meant the end of our efforts and - but that seemed very secondary, or it must have seemed to me - also of our lives.
He meant that Runeberg had been arrested or killed.1 Before the sun went down that day, I would meet the same fate.
Madden was ruthless.
Rather, he was bound to be ruthless.
An Irishman under the orders of England, a man accused of lukewarmness and perhaps treason, how could he not embrace and thank this miraculous favor: the discovery, the capture, perhaps the death, of two agents of the German Empire?
I went up to my room; I absurdly locked the door and threw myself on my back on the narrow iron bed.
In the window were the usual roofs and the cloudy sun at six.
It seemed incredible to me that that day without premonitions or symbols was the day of my implacable death.
Despite my father being dead, despite having been a child in a symmetrical garden in Ha¡ Feng, was I going to die now?
Then I reflected that all things happen to one precisely, precisely now.
Centuries upon centuries and only in the present do events occur; countless men in the air, on land and sea, and everything that really happens happens to me...
The almost intolerable memory of Madden's horselike face banished these ramblings.
In the midst of my hatred and my terror (now I don't mind speaking of terror: now that I have outwitted Richard Madden, now that my throat longs for the rope) I thought that this tumultuous and doubtless happy warrior did not suspect that I possessed the Secret .
The name of the precise place of the new British artillery park on the Ancre.
A bird scratched the gray sky and I blindly translated it into an airplane and that airplane into many (in the French sky) annihilating the artillery park with vertical bombs.
If my mouth, before it was shattered by a bullet, could shout that name so that it would be heard in Germany... My human voice was very poor.
How to make it reach the Chief's ear?
Into the ear of that sick and hateful man, who knew nothing of Runeberg and me except that we were in Staffordshire, and who waited in vain for news of us in his arid Berlin office, poring endlessly through newspapers...
I said out loud, "I must run away."
I sat up soundlessly, in a useless perfection of silence, as if Madden was already stalking me.
Something - perhaps the mere ostentation of proving that my resources were nil - made me check my pockets.
I found what I knew I would find: the American watch, the nickel chain and the square coin, the keyring with the compromising useless keys from Runeberg's apartment, the notebook, a letter that I resolved to destroy immediately (and did not destroy), a crown, two shillings and a few pence, the red-blue pencil, the handkerchief, the revolver with a bullet.
Absurdly I grabbed it and weighed to give myself courage.
I vaguely thought that a gunshot can be heard far away.
In ten minutes my plan was ripe.
The phone book gave me the name of the only person capable of passing on the news: she lived in a suburb of Fenton, less than half an hour by train.
“I am a cowardly man.
Now I say it, now that I have carried out a plan that nobody will not describe as risky.
I know that his execution was terrible.
I didn't do it for Germany, no.
I do not care about a barbaric country, which has forced me to the abjection of being a spy.
Besides, I know of a man from England - a modest man - who to me is no less than Goethe.
I didn't speak to him for over an hour, but for an hour it was Goethe...
I did it, because I felt that the boss was a little afraid of those of my race - the innumerable ancestors who converge in me.
I wanted to prove to him that a yellow could save his armies.
Besides, I had to run away from the captain.
His hands and his voice could knock at my door at any moment.
3 I dressed quietly, said goodbye to myself in the mirror, went downstairs, scanned the quiet street and went out.
The station was not far from home, but I thought it preferable to take a car.
I argued that in this way I ran less risk of being recognized; the fact is that in the deserted street I felt infinitely visible and vulnerable.
I remember telling the coachman to stop just before the central entrance.
I went down with voluntary and almost painful slowness; I was going to the village of Ashgrove, but I took out a ticket for a station farther away.
The train was leaving in a few minutes, at eight fifty.
I hurried; the next one would leave at half past nine.
There was hardly anyone on the platform.
I went through the cars: I remember some farmers, a woman in mourning, a young man who fervently read the Annals of Tacitus, a wounded and happy soldier.
The cars finally started.
A man I recognized ran in vain to the edge of the platform.
It was Captain Richard Madden.
Annihilated, trembling, I shrunk to the other end of the chair, away from the dreaded glass.
“From this annihilation I passed to an almost abject happiness.
I told myself that my duel was already committed and that I had won the first assault, by circumventing, even for forty minutes, even by chance, the attack of my adversary.
I argued that this minimal victory foreshadowed total victory.
I argued that it was not minimal, since without that precious difference that the train schedule offered me, I would be in jail, or dead.
I argued (no less sophistically) that my cowardly happiness proved that I was a man capable of bringing the adventure to a successful conclusion.
From that weakness I drew strength that did not abandon me.
I foresee that man will resign himself every day to more atrocious undertakings; soon there will be only warriors and bandits; I give you this advice: "The executor of an atrocious undertaking must imagine that he has already fulfilled it, he must impose a future that is irrevocable like the past."
So I proceeded, while my eyes of a man already dead registered the flow of that day that was perhaps the last, and the diffusion of the night.
The train ran gently, between ash trees.
He stopped, almost in the middle of the field.
Nobody shouted the name of the station.
"Ashgrove?" I asked some guys on the platform.
"Ashgrove," they answered.
I went down.
»A lamp illustrated the platform, but the faces of the children remained in the shaded area.
One questioned me: "Do you go to Dr. Stephen Albert's house?" Without waiting for an answer, another said: "The house is far from here, but you will not get lost if you take that road to the left and at each crossroads of the road turn left."
I tossed them a coin (the last one), went down some stone steps and entered the lonely road.
It slowly went down.
It was elemental earth, above the branches were confused, the low and circular moon seemed to accompany me.
“For an instant, I thought that Richard Madden had somehow penetrated my desperate purpose.
Very soon I understood that this was impossible.
The advice of 4 always turn left reminded me that such was the common procedure for discovering the central courtyard of certain labyrinths.
I understand something about labyrinths; not for nothing am I the great-grandson of that Ts'ui Pên, who was governor of Yunnan and who renounced temporal power to write a novel that was even more populous than the Hung Lu Meng and to build a labyrinth in which all men would get lost .
Thirteen years he devoted himself to these heterogeneous efforts, but the hand of a stranger killed him and his novel was senseless and no one found the labyrinth.
Under the English trees I meditated on that lost labyrinth: I imagined it inviolate and perfect on the secret summit of a mountain, I imagined it erased by rice fields or under water, I imagined it infinite, not just of octagonal kiosks and paths that return, but of rivers and provinces and kingdoms... I thought of a labyrinth of labyrinths, of a sinuous growing labyrinth that embraced the past and the future and that somehow involved the stars.
Absorbed in these illusory images, I forgot my destiny as a persecuted person.
I felt, for an indeterminate time, an abstract perceiver of the world.
The vague and living field, the moon, the remains of the afternoon, worked on me; also the decline that eliminated any possibility of fatigue.
The afternoon was intimate, infinite.
The path descended and forked, between the already confused meadows.
High-pitched, syllabic music approached and receded on the swaying of the wind, misted with leaves and distance.
I thought that a man can be an enemy of other men, of other times of other men, but not of a country; not of fireflies, words, gardens, watercourses, sunsets.
Thus I came to a tall, rusty gate.
Between the bars I deciphered a mall and a kind of pavilion.
I suddenly understood two things, the first trivial, the second almost incredible: the music came from the pavilion, the music was Chinese.
Therefore, I had fully accepted her, without paying attention to her.
I don't remember if there was a bell or a doorbell or if I rang by clapping my hands.
The sizzle of music continued.
»But from the back of the intimate house a lantern was approaching: a lantern that the trunks scratched and at times canceled out, a paper lantern, which had the shape of drums and the color of the moon.
It was carried by a tall man.
I didn't see his face, because the light blinded me.
He opened the gate and said slowly in my language: “-I see that the pious Hsi Pêng endeavors to correct my loneliness.
You will certainly want to see the garden?
I recognized the name of one of our consuls and repeated, bewildered: 'The garden?
»-The garden of forking paths.
»Something stirred in my memory and I pronounced with incomprehensible certainty: 5 »-The garden of my ancestor Ts'ui Pên.
"'His ancestor of his?
His illustrious ancestor of his?
Go ahead.
“The wet path zigzagged like those of my childhood.
We arrive at a library of Eastern and Western books.
I recognized, bound in yellow silk, some manuscript volumes of the Lost Encyclopedia directed by the Third Emperor of the Luminous Dynasty and which was never printed.
The gramophone record spun alongside a bronze phoenix.
I also remember a vase from the pink family and another, many centuries earlier, of that blue color that our craftsmen copied from the potters of Persia...
» Stephen Albert watched me, smiling.
He was (I already said) very tall, sharp-featured, with gray eyes and a gray beard.
There was something of the priest in him and also of the sailor; later he told me that he had been a missionary in Tientsin "before becoming a sinologist."
"We sit; me on a long, low divan; he with his back to the window and to a tall circular clock.
I calculated that within an hour my pursuer, Richard Madden, would not arrive.
My irrevocable determination could wait.
"'Ts'ui Pên's fate is astonishing,' said Stephen Albert.
Governor of his native province, learned in astronomy, astrology and in the indefatigable interpretation of canonical books, chess player, famous poet and calligrapher: he abandoned everything to compose a book and a labyrinth.
He renounced the pleasures of oppression, of justice, of the numerous bed, of banquets and even of learning, and he cloistered himself for thirteen years in the Pavilion of Limpid Solitude.
At his death, his heirs found nothing but chaotic manuscripts.
The family, as you may not be aware, wanted to assign them to the fire; but his executor (a Taoist or Buddhist monk) insisted on publication.
'Those of the blood of Ts'ui Pên,' I replied, 'we continue to execrate that monk.
That post was insane.
The book is an indecisive collection of contradictory drafts.
I have examined it once: in the third chapter the hero dies, in the fourth he is alive.
As for Ts'ui Pên's other company, his Labyrinth... “'Here is the Labyrinth,' he said, indicating a tall lacquered desk.
"-A labyrinth of ivory! I exclaimed.
A minimal labyrinth... "'A labyrinth of symbols,' he corrected.
An invisible labyrinth of time.
To me, barbarian Englishman, it has been granted me to reveal that diaphanous mystery.
After more than a hundred years, the details are irretrievable, but it is not difficult to conjecture what happened.
Ts'ui Pên would once say: "I am retiring to write a book."
And another: "I retire to build a labyrinth."
Everyone imagined two works; no one thought that book and labyrinth were a single object.
The Pavilion of Limpid Solitude stood in the center of a perhaps intricate garden; the fact may have suggested to men a physical labyrinth.
Ts'ui Pên died; no one, in the extensive lands that were his, found the labyrinth; the confusion of the novel suggested to me that this was the labyrinth.
Two circumstances gave me the correct solution of the problem.
One: the curious legend that Ts'ui Pên had proposed a labyrinth that was strictly infinite.
Another: a fragment of a letter I discovered.
Albert got up.
He turned his back on me for a few moments; he opened a drawer of the golden and blackened desk.
He came back with a previously crimson paper; now pink and dim and checkered.
It was just the calligraphic renown of Ts'ui Pên.
I read with incomprehension and fervor these words that a man of my blood wrote with a meticulous brush: "I leave to the various futures (not to all) my garden of forking paths."
I silently handed the sheet back.
Albert went on: “Before exhuming this letter, I had wondered how a book can be infinite.
I did not conjecture any other procedure than that of a cyclic, circular volume.
A volume whose last page was identical to the first, with the possibility of continuing indefinitely.
I also remembered that night that is in the middle of The Thousand and One Nights, when Queen Shahrazad (due to a magical distraction of the copyist) begins to refer verbatim the story of The Thousand and One Nights, at the risk of reaching the night in which he mentions it, and so on ad infinitum.
I also imagined a platonic, hereditary work, handed down from father to son, in which each new individual added a chapter or corrected with pious care the page of the elders.
Those guesses distracted me; but none seemed to correspond, even remotely, to the contradictory chapters of Ts'ui Pên.
In this perplexity, the manuscript which you have examined was forwarded to me from Oxford.
Naturally, I stopped at the phrase: "I leave to the various futures (not all) my garden of forking paths."
Almost immediately I understood; The Garden of Forking Paths was the chaotic novel; the phrase "several futures (not all)" suggested to me the image of the bifurcation in time, not in space.
The general rereading of the work confirmed that theory.
In all fictions, whenever a man is faced with several alternatives, he chooses one and eliminates the others; in that of the almost inextricable Ts'ui Pên, he opts-simultaneously-for all of them.
He thus creates various futures, various times, which also proliferate and bifurcate.
Hence the contradictions of the novel.
Fang, let's say, has a secret; a stranger knocks on his door; Fang resolves to kill him.
Naturally, there are several possible outcomes: Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill Fang, both can be saved, both can die, and so on.
In Ts'ui Pên's work, all outcomes occur; each one is the starting point of other forks.
Sometimes, the paths of this labyrinth converge: for example, you arrive at this house, but in one of the possible past 7 you are my enemy, in another my friend.
If you resign yourself to my incurable pronunciation, we will read a few pages.
His face, in the vivid circle of the lamp, was doubtless that of an old man, but with something unshakable and even immortal.
He read with slow precision two redactions of the same epic chapter.
In the first, an army marches into battle across a deserted mountain; the horror of the stones and the shadow makes him despise life and he easily achieves victory; in the second, the same army crosses a palace where there is a party; the resplendent battle seems to them a continuation of the party and they achieve victory.
I listened with decent reverence to these old fictions, perhaps less admirable than the fact that they had been devised by my blood and restored to me by a man from a remote empire, in the course of a desperate adventure, on a western island.
I remember the final words, repeated in each editorial like a secret commandment: "Thus the heroes fought, the admirable heart calm, the sword violent, resigned to kill and to die."
“From that moment, I felt around me and in my dark body an invisible, intangible swarming.
Not the swarming of divergent, parallel, and ultimately coalescing armies, but a more inaccessible, more intimate turmoil that they somehow foreshadowed.
Stephen Albert went on: '-I don't think his illustrious ancestor played idly at variations.
I do not think it likely that he would sacrifice thirteen years to the endless execution of a rhetorical experiment.
In his country, the novel is a subordinate genre; at that time it was a despicable genre.
Ts'ui Pên was a great novelist, but he was also a man of letters who certainly did not consider himself a mere novelist.
The testimony of his contemporaries proclaimed -and his life confirms it enough- his metaphysical and mystical interests.
Philosophical controversy usurps much of his novel.
I know that of all the problems, none bothered him and worked him like the abysmal problem of time.
Now, that's the only problem that doesn't figure in the pages of the Garden.
He doesn't even use the word that means time.
How do you explain this willful omission?
»I proposed several solutions; all insufficient.
We discuss them; Finally, Stepheri Albert told me: »-In a riddle whose theme is chess, what is the only forbidden word?
»I reflected a moment and replied: »-The word chess.
8 “'Precisely,' said Albert, 'The Garden of Forking Paths is a huge riddle, or parable, whose theme is time; that recondite cause forbids the mention of his name.
Always omitting a word, resorting to inept metaphors and obvious periphrases, is perhaps the most emphatic way to indicate it.
It is the tortuous way that he preferred, in each of the meanderings of his indefatigable novel, the oblique Ts'ui Pên.
I have compared hundreds of manuscripts, I have corrected the errors that the negligence of the copyists has introduced, I have conjectured the plan of that chaos, I have reestablished, I have believed to reestablish the primordial order, I have translated the entire work: I know that he does not use a single time the word time.
The explanation is obvious: The Garden of Forking Paths is an incomplete, but not false, image of the universe as conceived by Ts'ui Pên.
Unlike Newton and Schopenhauer, his ancestor did not believe in uniform, absolute time.
He believed in infinite series of times, in a growing and vertiginous network of divergent, convergent and parallel times.
That web of times that are approaching, bifurcate, cut off or that are secularly ignored, encompasses all possibilities.
We do not exist in most of those times; in some you exist and not me; in others, me, not you; in others, both.
In this one, which a favorable chance has in store for me, you have arrived at my house; in another, you, crossing the garden, have found me dead; in another, I say these same words, but I am a mistake, a ghost.
"-In all of them," I articulated, not without a tremor, "I appreciate and venerate your recreation of the garden of Ts'ui Pên.
'Not at all,' he murmured with a smile.
Time perpetually forks into countless futures.
In one of them I am his enemy.
“I felt again that swarming of which I spoke.
It seemed to me that the damp garden surrounding the house was infinitely saturated with invisible people.
Those people were Albert and I, secretive, busy and multiform in other dimensions of time.
I raised my eyes and the faint nightmare dissipated.
In the yellow and black garden there was only one man; but that man was strong as a statue, but that man was walking down the path and he was Captain Richard Madden.
"'The future already exists,' I answered, 'but I am his friend.
May I examine the letter again?
"Albert got up.
Tall, he opened the drawer of the tall desk; he turned his back on me for a moment.
I had prepared the revolver.
I fired carefully: Albert collapsed without complaint, immediately.
I swear that his death was instantaneous: a lightning strike.
» The rest is unreal, insignificant.
Madden barged in, arrested me.
I have been sentenced to hang.
Abominably I have won: I have communicated to Berlin the secret name of the city they must attack.
Yesterday they bombed it; I read it in the same newspapers that proposed to England the enigma that the wise sinologist Stephen Albert was murdered by an unknown person, Yá Tsun.
The boss has cracked that riddle.
He knows that my problem was to indicate (through the noise of war) the city called Albert and that I found no other way than to kill a person of that name.
He does not know (no one can know) my innumerable contrition and weariness.
»
1 Obnoxious and bizarre hypothesis.
The Prussian spy Hans Rabener alias Viktor Runeberg attacked the bearer of the arrest warrant, Captain Richard Madden, with an automatic pistol.
This, in self-defense, caused injuries that determined the death of him.
(Editor's note.)